I 


« 


Phyfitia 


0 

An  Aftrologo-Phyfical  Difcourfe  of  the  Vulgar 

Herbs  of  this  N^ation. 

mayprefervehMj  in  Health;  or  cure  hmjelf,  being 

‘  M.,  for  three  fence  charge,  mthjuch  things  only 

^  as  grm  in  England,  they  being  mojl  fit 

for  Engli/h^odies, 

,  “  w'l;  oTmaking  Plaifters/Oyntments,  Oyls  Pultif= 

fes  Syrups,  Decoa:ions,Julips, or  Waters, ofallfortso  i 

PhyficalHerbs,Thatyou  may  have  them  readic  tor  your 

u  feat  all  times  of  the  yeer.  ,  -p  r„Cf.A  \n 

2.  What  Planet  governeth  every  Herb  or  Tree  (uled  m 
’  Phyfick)  that  groweth  in  EngUni. 

7.  The  Time  of  gathering  all  Herbs,  both  Vulgarly,  and 

4.  TheWayofdl-ying  and  keeping  the  Herbs  all  the  yeer 

5.  The  Way  of  keeping  their  Juyces  ready  for  ufe  at  all 

6.  The  Way  of  making  and  keeping  all  kind  of  ufeful 

Compounds  made  of  Herbs. 

7.  The  way  of  mixing  Medicines  according  to  W  ^nd 
and  Mixture  of  the  Dijea/e,  and  fart  of  the  Body  JjfhSiei. 

By  Culpeper,  Gent.  Student  in  Thyficl^ 

and  (^Hrologie^. 

L  0  2i  f>  0  N: 

Printedby  feter  Cole,  at  the  fign  of  the  Printing«Preis  m 
Cornhil,  near  the  Royal  Exchange.  1^52. 


TO  THE  READER. 


Courteous  Reader^ 


of  Man^jhit  the  Nail  on  the  Head  when  he  faid-,  That 
Man  is  naturally  enclined  to^  and  defirous  of  Know- 


ledg:  and  indeed  it  is  palpable  and  apparent^  that  as 
Pride  is  the  firft  vifible  fin  in  a  child;,  whereby  we  may 


gather  that  it  was  the  firft  fin  of  Adamt,  fo  Knowledg 


being  the  firft  Vertue  a  Child  minds^  as  is  apparent  to  them  that  do 
but  with  the  eye  of  Reafon  heed  their  a^lions  even  whilft  they  are  ve¬ 
ry  yong,  even  before  they  are  ayeer  old^  everi  by  natural  inftind", 
whereby  a  man  may  more  than  guefs  that  Knowledg  was  the  greateft 
lofs^  or  at  leaft  one  of  the  greateft  we  loft  by  the  fall  of  Adap^ :  Know¬ 
ledge  faith  Ariflotle^  is  in  Troj^eritj  an  Crnament^  in  Adverfty  a  Refugee 
and  truly  there  is  almoft  no  greater  enemy  to  Knowledg  in  the  world 
than  Pride  and  Covetoufnefs :  Excellently  faid^  Juvenal^  Sat,  7. 


Scire  v'jlnnt  omnes-j  mercedem  folvere  nemo. 

AWtoHgb  all  men')  in  Y^nowledg  taj^e  delight) 
Tet  they  love  money  better-)  that's  the  j^ight. 


And  agaiue  fomemen  are  fo  damnable  proud  and  envious  withah 
that  they  would  have  no  body  know  any  thing  but  themfelves  5  the 
one  I  hope  will  fhortly  learn  better  mannerse  and  the  other  be  a  bur¬ 
den  too  heavy  for  the  Earth  long  to  bear. 

The  Subjeft  which  I  here  fixed  my  thoughts  upon  is  not  only  the 
Defeription  and  Nature  ofHerbsj  which  had  it  been  alb  t  had  autho¬ 
rity  fufficient  to  bear  me  out  in  it^  ^or  Solomon  employed  partofthat 
wifdom  he  asked;,  and  received  of  God  in  fearching  after  them^  which 
he  wrote  in  Books^  even  of  all  Herbs;,  Plants  and  Trees  ^  fome  fay 
thofe  Writings  were  carried  to  Babylon  by  Nebuchadnezzar  ^  being  kept 
in  the  Temple  at  Jerufalem  for  the  publick  view  of  the  People;,  but  being 
tranfported  to  Babylon  in  the  Captivity;,  Alexander  the  Great  Ty¬ 
rant  at  the  taking  o^Babylon  gave  them  to  his  Mafter  Arislotlej  who 
committed  them  to  the  mercy  of  the  fire. 

Butfincethedaies  of^^?W/<7«5  many  have  thofe  famous  men  been 
that  have  written  of  this  Subjefr,  and  great  Encouragements  have 


A 


been 


TO  THE  READER. 


been  given  them  by  Princes^  ofwhich  I  fhall  quote  an  example  or 
twoj  Mathiolus  his  greedinefs  was  fuch  to  finifh  his  Comment  upon  Di- 
ofeoricksy  which  Rook  is  yet  in  ufe  in  the  famous  Univerhties  in  Leydeti 
mHollandy^MountpUer  in  Franccythdit  he  forgot  to  count  what  the  char- 
ges  ot  it  might  amount  tO;>  although  I  rather  c5mend  him  for  his  dilii- 
genee  inStudieand  Care  of  the  Worlds  good^than  harbor  the  leafi:  ill 
thought  of  him  for  not  counting  the  middle  and  both  ends  before  he 
began  the  Work,  I  fay  when  he  came  to  count  the  charges  of  Printing 
and  cutting  the  Cuts,  it  far  furmounted  hisEftate^  in  this  he  was  a- 
bundantly  furniilied  by  Ferdinand  the  Emperor,  and  diverfe  other 
Princes  oiGermmyy  as  himfelf  confefled  furniflted  hirn  with  great  fums 
ofmoney,  for  perfecting  that  fo  great,  fo  good  a  Work  5  the  Prince 
Eled'or  of-^^xwi/ fent  him  much  money  towards  his  charge,  as  alfo 
"joachimy  Marquefs  of  Brandenbnrgy  who  as  he  was  neighbor  to  Saxony  in 
Place,  fo  was  he  in  At  eftion  to  fo  good  a  Work  ^  Frederich^y  Count  Ta^ 
laiimof  the  Rhincy  the:  Cardinal  Prince  of  trenty  the  Arch  Bifiop  of  Saltz,- 
bergj  th  e  Vuf^es  of  Bavaria  and  Clevelandy  and  the  Free  state  of  Norimbergj 
together  with  many  others,  fo  that  he  had  the  help  of  the  Emperor, 
of  Arch  Dukes,  Dukes,  Eledors,  Cardinals,  Princes.  Happie  is  that 
Nation  whofe  Magiftrates  countenance  fuch  as  mind  and  ftudy  their 
Good  :  1  might  inftance  in  many  more,and  thereby  give  you  a  glimps 
how  Magiftrates  formerly  favored  this  Art,  and  which  is  more,  how 
ftudious  they  were  in  it-  Bellonim  a  man  that  foared  high  in  the  Na- 
tureof  Herbs,  alfo  profeffed  he  had  the  helping  hand  of  Kings  and 
Cardinals  to  maintain  him  in  his  Studies,  and  more  than  this.  Kings 
themfelves  were  Studious  in  it  5  amongfl:  which  (  Solomon  excepted) 
Uithridates  that  renowned  King  of  Tontm  feems  to  bear  away  the  Bell, 
his  Writings  after  his  death  were  found  in  his  Country  Mannor  by 
the  great,  but  never  a  Roman  ofthemallhad  the  honefty  to 
print  them  with  his  name  in  theFrontifpiece,  fo  that  we  have  nothing 
of  them  but  what  is  quoted  byfome  honeft  Authors,  efpecially  by 
rlntarch. 

4d  nos  vix  tenuis  fam£  dilabitur  aura. 

Men  mind  our  goody  but  fuch  crof  times  dofally 

We  only  hear  they  didy  and  that  is  all. 

Mefue  King  of Damafeu^y  Avicennay  and  Fvax  King  of  Arahi ay  labored 
much  in  this  Study,  and  I  could  well  have  afforded  to  have  me//tio- 
ned  Diocleftan  the  Roman  Emperor  had  he  not  waffled  out  his  Vertues, 
and  defiled  them  with  a  Purple  ffain,  in  a  moff:  bloody  pcrfecution  of 
Chriftians.  It  is  quoted  in  F/r^77,tha^when  a  famous  Prince  was  proffe¬ 
red  by  to  be  taught  his  Arts,  vjt:,.  Thyfeko  and 

the  Art  of fhooting  in  the  Bovpy  he  made  choice  of  Phyfick  and  to  know 
the  Nature  of  Herbs. 

Ipfi 


TO  THE  READER. 


^pfi mnnerd-)  l£ti0  AppoUo 

Augurium:,  Cither amq’-y  dedit^  celerefq'-^fagitUSj 
lUe-y  ut  depojiti  preferret  fata  Varentk 
Scire  poteflates  Berbarumy  ufumqy  Medendi 
Maluit :  &  mntas  agi tare  (inglori as )  Art es. 

Hk  Arts  to  himy  when  great  h^^oWo  gavcy 
He  did  nor  Augurjiy  nor  Arrows  cravey 
Nor  the  Melodious  Lutey  but  to  prevent 
His  Fathers  deathy  who  now  with  age  was  j^enty 
to  be  an  Herharifty  and  Medicine 
to  learny  he  rather  did  his  thoughts  incline. 

So  precious  hath  the  knowledg  of  the  Vertues  of  Herbs  been  in 
former  tiines  to  men  of  quality^  and  indeed  happy  is  that  Nation^ 
whofe  Rulers  mind  Knowledge  as  Solomon  faith  on  the  contrary.  Wo 
to  that  Nation  whofe  King  is  a  Childy  andindeedin  Ancient  times  people 
need  little  other  Phyfick  than  fuch  Herbs  as  grew  neer  them,  fome 
Footfteps  of  which  and  but  a  few  only,  are  now  in  ufe  with  us  to  this 
day,  as  people  ufually  boyl  F ennel  with  Fifh,  and  know  not  why  they 
doitbutonlyforcuftom,  when  indeed  the  Original  ofit  was  foun¬ 
ded  upon  Reafon,  becaufe  F ennel  confumes  that  Flegmatick  quality 
of  Fifh,  which  is  obnoxious  to  the  Body  of  man, Fennel  being  an  Herb 
Mercury y  and  he  fogreat  anEnemie  to  the  Sign 

Inthis  Art  the  Worthies  of  our  own  Nation,  Gerardy  Johnfony  and' 
Tarkinfonarenottohe  iovgoneny  who  did  much  good  in  the  Studie 

of  this  Art,  yet  they  and  all  others  that  wrote  of  the  Nature  of  Herbs, 
gave  not  a  bit  ofareafon  why  fuch  an  Herb  was  apropriated  to  fuch 
t  part  of  the  Body,  nor  why  it  cured  fuch  a  Difeafe  5  truly  my  own 
body  being  fickly  brought  me  eafily  into  a  capacitie  to  know  that 
Health  was  the  greateft  of  all  Earthly  Bleflings,  and  truly  he  was  ne¬ 
ver  fick  that  doth  not  beleeve  it  ^  then  I  confidered  that  all  Medicines 

were  compounded  ofHerbs,Roots,Flowers,  Seeds  See.  and  this  firft 

fet  me  awork  in  ftudying  the  Nature  of  Simples,moft  of  which  I  knew 
by  fight  before,  and  indeed  all  the  Authors  I  could  reade  gave  me  but 
little  fatisfaftion  in  this  particular,  or  none  at  all  5  I  cannot  build  my 
faith  upon  Authors  words,  nor  beleeve  a  thing  becaufe  they  fay  it,and 
could  wilh  every  bodie  were  of  my  mind  in  this,  to  labor  to  be  able  to 
give  a  reafon  for  everything  they  fay  or  do  5  they  fay  reafon  makes  a 
man  differ  from  a  Beaft,  if  that  be  true,  pray  what  are  they  that  in- 
ftead  of  Reafon  for  their  judgment,  quote  old  Authors,  perhaps  theip 
Authors  knew  a  reafon  for  what  they  Wrote,  perhaps  they  did  not, 
what  is  that  to  us,  do  we  know  it?  Truly  in  writing  this  Work  nr  ft, 
tofiitisfiemyfelf  I  drew  out  all  the  Vertues  of  vulgar  Herbs, 
andTrees&c.  out  of  the  beft  and  nioft  approved  Authors  1  had  or 
could  get,  and  having  done  fo,  I  fetmy  felfto  ftudie  the  Reafon  of 

A  2  them  5 


TO  THE  B.EA  DER. 


them  5  I  knew  well  enough  the  whol  world  and  every  thing  in  it  was 
formed  of  a  Compofition  of  contrary  Elements;,  and  in  fuch  a  harmo¬ 
ny  as  mud  needs  Ihew  the  wifdomand  Power  ofa  great  God.  I  knew 
as  well  this  Creation  though  thus  compofed  of  contraries  was  one  u- 
nited  Body^andman  an  Epitome  ofit^l  knew  thofe  various  afFedions 
in  man  in  refped  of  Sickncfs  and  Health  were  caufed  Naturally 
(though  God  may  have  other  endsbed  known  tohimfelf)  by  the  va¬ 
rious  operations  of  the  and  I  could  not  be  ignorant^  that 

astheCaufe  is^  fo  mud  the  Cure  be,  and  therefore  he  that  would 
know  the  Reafon  of  the  operation  of  Herbs  mud  lookup  as  high  as 
the  Stars  5  lalwaies  found  the  Difeafe  vary  according  to  the  various 
motion  of  the  Stars,  and  this  is  enough  one  would  think  to  teach  a 
manby  the  EtFed  where  the  Caufe  lay/  Then  to  find  out  the  Reafon 
oftheOperation  of  Herbs,  Plants,  &c.  by  the  Stars  went  I,  and  here¬ 
in  I  could  find  but  few  Authors,  but  thofe  as  full  of  nonfenfe  and  con- 
tradidions  as  an  Egg  is  full  of  meat,  this  being  little  pleafing,  and  Icfsi 
profitable  to  me,  I  confulted  with  my  two  Brothers,  Df  R  e  A  s  o  N, 
and  D*"  E  X  p  E  R  I  E  n  c  E,  and  took  a  Voyage  to  vifit  my  Mother 
Nature,  by  whofe  advice  together  with  the  help  of  Dr  D  i  l  li¬ 
cence,!  at  lad  obtained  my  defires,  and  being  warned  by  M*'  Hone- 
fiyy  a  dranger  in  our  daies  to  publifh  it  to  the  World,  I  have  done  it.  , 

But  you  will  fay,  What  need  I  have  rvritten  ofthk  SubjeB^  fo  many 

famous  and  learned  men  have  written  fo  fnuch  of  it  in  the  Englifi  Tongue^  nay 
much  more  than  I  have  done. ^  , 

TothisI  Anfwer,  ; 

1.  All  that  have  written  of  Herbs  either  in  the  Englifh  or  not  in  the 
Englifh  Tongue,  have  no  waies  anfwered  my  intents  in  this  Book,  for 
they  have  intermixed  many,  nay  very  many  outlandifh  Elerbs,and  ve¬ 
ry  many  which  are  hard,  nay  not  at  all  to  be  gotten,  and  what  harm 
this  may  do  I  am  very  fenfible  of.  Once  a  Student  in  Phyfick  in  Suf- 
fex  {ent  up  to  London  to  mcy  to  buy  for  him  fuch  and  fuch  Medicines,’ 
and  fend  them  down,  which  when  I  viewed,  they  were  Medicines 
quoted  by  Authors  living  in  another  Nation,  and  not  to  be  had  m  Lon¬ 
don  for  Love  nor  Money,fo  the  poor  man  had  fpent  much  pains  and 
Brains  in  dudying  Medicines  for  a  Difeafe  that  were  not  to  be  had  ^  fo 
a  man  reading  Gerards  or  Par^infons  Herbal  for  the  Cure  of  a  Difeaf,  he 
mayaslikeasnot,  light  on  an  Herb  that  is  not  here  to  be  had^  or  not 
without  great  difficulty,  if  pofhblc  5  but  in  mine,  all  grow  neer  hiih. 

2.  My  lad,  though  not  the  lead  of  my  Rcafons  is.  Neither  GerW, 
uoxParkinfon  nor  any  that  ever  wrote  in  the  like  Nature,  ever  gave 
one  wife  Reafon  for  what  they  wrote,  and  fo  did  nothing  elf  but  train 
up  yong  Novices  in  Phyfick  in  the  School  of  Tradition, and  teach  them 
jud  as  a  Parrot  is  taught  to  fpeak,  an  Author  faith  fo,  therefore  tis 
true,  and  if  all  that  Authors  fay  be  true,  why  do  they  contradidc  one 
another?  Butin  mine,  if  you  view  it  with  the  Eye  of  Reafon,  you 
fhall  fee  a  Reafon  for  every  thing  that  is  written,^  whereby  you  may 
find  the  very  Ground  and  Foundation  of  Phyfick,  you  may  know 

what 


TO  THE  ElEADEEL. 


what  you  do,  and  wherefore  you  do  it,  and  this  ftall  call  me  Father, 
it  bein^  (that  1  know  of  3  never  done  in  the  world  before. 

1  have  now  but  two  things  more  to  write  and  then  I  have  done. 

1  what  the  profit  and  benefit  of  thk  W orkjs, 

2  JnflriSions  in  the  Vfe  of  it. 

I  TheTrofit  and  Benefits  arifing  from  it,  or  that  may  acme  to  a 
wife  man,  from  it  are  many,  fo  many  that  ftould  1  fum  up  al  the  par¬ 
ticulars,  the  Epiftle  would  be  as  big  as  the  Book;  I  {hall  only  quote 

fome  few  general  Heads.  ^  ■  l  •  r 

Firft,  The  admirable  Harmony  of  the  Creation  is  herein  feen,  in 

the  InHuence  of  Stars  upon  Herbs  and  the  Body  of  man,  how  one  part 

of  the  Creation  is  fubfervient  to  another,  and  all  for  the  ufe  ot  man 

whereby  the  Infinite  Power  and  Wifdom  of  God  in  the  Creation  ap¬ 
pears  i  and  if  I  do  not  admire  at  the  fimplicity  of  the  Ranters,  never 

truftme,  who  but  viewing  the  Creation  can  hold  fuch  a  fottllh  Opi¬ 
nion,  as  that  it  was  from  eternity,  when  the  Myfter.es  ofit  are  fo  cleer 
to  eyerie  eye;  but  that  Scripture  (hall  be  verified  to  them,  Rvm.  I. 
20  The  invMle  things  of  Him  fiom  the  Creation  of  the  world  are  cleenf/een, 
beinz  underflood  by  the  things  that  are  made,  .even  hk  eternal  Power  and  God- 
headfo  that  they  are  without  exoife.  And  a  Poet  could  teach  them  a  better 

Lefibii. 

Excideret  ne  tihi  divini  munerk  author 
T’refentem  monflrat^  ^udibet  Herba  Deum. 

Becaufe  out  of  thy  thoughts  God fioould  not  pafiy 
Hk  Image  ft amped  k  on  every  Graft. 


This  indeed  is  true,  God  hath  ftamped  his  Image  upon  every  Crea¬ 
ture,  and  therefore  the  abufe  of  the  Creature  is  a  great  fin  ^  but  how 
muchmoredoth  the  Wifdom  and  Excellencie  [of  God  appear  if  we 
confider  the  Harmony  of  the  Creation  in  the  Vertue  and  Operation  of 

every  Herb  ^  thisis^hefirlt.  .  , 

Secondly,  Hereby  thou maift  know  what  infinite  Knowledg  Adam 
had  in  his  Innocencie,  th  at  by  looking  upon  a  Creature,  he  was  a  e 
to  give  it  a  name  according  to  his  Natu  re,  and  by  knowing  that,  ^kou 
maift  know  how  great  thy  fall  was,  and  be  humbled  for  it  even  in  this 

refped,  becaufe  hereby  thou  art  fo  ignorant. 

Thirdly,  Here  is  the  right  way  for  thee  to  begin  the  Itudy  otEhy- 
fi  'k  if  thou  art  minded  to  begin  at  the  right  end,  for  here  thou  haft  the 
Reafon  of  the  whol  Art.  1  wrote  before  in  certain  Aftrological  Le- 
a:ures  which  I  read,  and  printed,  intituled  Semeiotica  Vranica  what 
Planet  caufed  (as  a  fecond  Caufe)  every  Difeafe,  and  how  it  might  be 
found  out  what  Planet  caufed  it ,  here  thou  haft  what  Planet  cures  it 
by  Sympathy  and  Antipathy  h  and  this  brings  me  tomy  laft  promife,  Viz. 

Tnfiruclions  for  the  right  life  of  the  Boo  -  ,  rn  c 

And  herein  let  roe  nremife  a  word  or  two,  Manv  Plants,occ  ^ 

B  are 


TO  THE  READER. 


are  not  nr  the  Book  apropnated  to  their  propper  Planets,  the  Reafon 
was,  want  of  time,  or  fome  other  thing  elle^  which  many  that  know 
mewilleafilyguefsat;  at  laft  the  Book  hanging  longer  in  the  Prefs 
than  1  imagined  it  would,  I  took  the  time  and  pains  (though  I  could 
ill  have  fpared  either)  to  apropriate  them  all,  and  have  for  thy  bene¬ 
fit  (Courteous  Reader)  inferred  them  in  order  after  the  Epiftl4  now 
then  for  tny  Inttnicrion, 

Firft,  ConGder  what  Planet  caufeth  the  Difeafe  ;  that  thou  maift 
find  in  my  Semeiotica. 

Secondly^  Confider  what  part  of  the  Body  is  affiided  by  the  Difeaf, 
and  whether  it  lie  in  the  Flexor  Blood;,  or  Bonesj  or  Ventricles. 

Thirdly^  Confider  by  what  Planet  the  afflifted  part  of  the  Bodieis 
governed  ^  that  my  SemeioticaWiW  inform  you  in  alfo. 

Fourthly,  You  have  in  this  Book  the  Herbs  for  Cure  apropriated  to 
the  feveral  Difeafes,  and  the  Difeafes  for  your  eafe  fet  down  in  the 
Margin, whereby  you  may  firengthen  the  part  of  the  Eodie  by  its  like, 
as  the  Brain  by  Herbs  of  Mermrj^  the  Ereafi:  and  Liver  by  Herbs  of  V 
ptevj  the.  Heart  and  Vitals  by  Herbs  of  the  Sun^  &c. 

Fifthly,  You  may  oppofe  Difcafes  by  Herbs  of  the  Planet  oppofite 
to  the  Planet  that  caufeth  them,  as  Difcafes  of  Jupiter  by  Herbs  of 
Mercury^  and  the  contrary  ^  Difcafes  of  the  Luminaries  by  Herbs  oto* 

and  the  contrary  5  Difcafes  of  AL/rr  by  Herbs  of  Venus,  and  the 
contrary. 

Sixthly,  There  is  a  way  to  cure  Difeafes  fomtimes  by  Sympathy 

and  fo  every  Planet  cures  his  own  Difeafes,,  as  the  Sun  and  Moon  by 
their  Herbs  cure  the  Eyes,  the  Spleen,  Jupiter  the  Liver.  mJc 

the  Gall  and  Difeafes  of  Choller,and  Venus  Difeafes  in  the  Infiruments 
of  Generation. 

Seventhly,  Therewasafm.il  Treatife  of  mine  Humane  Vertues 
printed  at  the  latter  end  ofmy  Ephemerk  for  the  yeer  1651.  I  fuppofe 

it  would  do  much  good  to  yong  Students  to  perufe  that  with  this 
Book. 

Eighthly  Yong  Students  would  do  themfelvesmuch  good,  and  be¬ 
nefit  tbemfebes  exceedingly  intheStudy  ofPhyfick  if  they  would 
takthe  pains  to  view  the  Vertues  of  the  Herbs  &c.  in  the  Book,  and 
compare  them  tothefe  Rules,  they  lhallto  theirexceeding  great  con¬ 
tent  find  them  all  agreeableto  them,  and  lhall  thereby  fee  the  reafon 
why  fuch  an  Herb  conduceth  to  the  Cure  offuch  a  Difeafe. 

Ninthly,!  gave  you  the  Key  ofal  in  the  heih  Wormwood, vihich  ifbe- 
caufeofthc  volubility  of  the  Language,  any  think  it  will  not  fit  the 
Lock,  I  will  here  give  it  you  again  in  another  Herb  of  the  fame  Pl.a- 
net  which  in  the  Book  either  through  my  own  forgetfulnefs,  or  niv 
Amanuenfs  was  omitted,  and  here  Hbal  give  it  you  plainly  without 
any  circumftanecs.  ^ 

The  Herb  is  Carduus  LenediBus. 

It  is  called  Cardu^/s  BenediBu^fj  or  bleflfcd  Thifde  or  holy  Thifile,  I 
fuppofe  the  name  was  put  uppon  it  by  fome  that  had  little  HoIinefsL 

them' 


TO  THE  READER.. 


themfelves  .*  1 1  is  an  Hcab  of  MarJy  and  under  the  Sign  Jnes  5  now  in 
handling  this  Herb,  1  iliall  give  you  a  rational  Pattern  of  all  the  rcif, 
and  if  you  plcafe  to  view  them  throughout  the  Book,  you  diall  to 

your  content  find  it  true. 

U  'helps  Swimmings  and  giiddinef  of  the  Head-)  or  the  Difeafe  called  Verti¬ 
go,  hecanfe  Aiicsk  the  Hon  fe  of  Mars,  '  ,1 

It  k  an  excelknt  Remedy  againft  theyeU&w  Jat/ndteej  'and  other  If^rmities  of 
the  Gallyhecaufe  Mars  governs  Choller. 

It firengthens  the  attroBive  faculty  in  man^  and  clarifies  the  Bloody  becaufe  the 
one  is  ruled  by  Mars, 

The  contimtal  drinking  the  Deco&iott  of  it  helps  red  Facesj  Tetter s^  and  Ring- 
irormsbecatifeMar^  caufeth  them. 

It  helps  rlagueforesj  Boils^  and  Jtchj  theBitings  of  mad  Dogs  and  ^enemouf 
Beaflsj  all  which  tnfirmities  arc  under  Mars.  Thus  you  fee  what  it  doth 
by  Sympathy. 

By  Antypathy  to  other  Planets. 

It  cure s  the  French  Pox  by  Antypathy  to  V enus  who  governs  it. 

It  firengthens  the  Memory  and  0ires  Deafnefi  by  Antipathy  to  Saturn  who 
hath  hk  Fall  A r i es  which  Rules  the  Head. 

It  cures  ^artan  Agues^  and  other  Difeafe s  oj  MelanehoUy  and  aduji  C^oUer 
by  Sympathy  to  Satmrij  Mars  being  exalted  in  Capricorn. 

Alfo  it  provokes  Vrinej  the flopping  of  which  kufually  caufedby  Mars  or  thet 
Moon. 

Ifyou  pleafe  to  make  ufeofthefe  Rules, you  (hall  find  them’ true 
throughout  the  Book,  and  by  heeding  them,  you  may  be  able  to  give 
a  Reafon  of  your  Judgment  to  him  that  asketh  you  :  I  aflhre  you  it 
gave  much  content  to  me,  and  for  your  goods  did  I  pen  it  ^  buti  muft 
conclude,  my Epiftle  having  exceeded  its  Bounds  alreadie^  hereby 
you  fee  what  Reafon  may  be  given  for  Medicines,  and  what  necclfity 
there  is  for  every  vhyfitian  to  be  an  Afirologerj  you  have  heard  it  before 
I  fuppofe,  but  now  you  know  ic  5  what  remains,  but  that  you  labo^ 
to  glorifie  Godinyour  feveral  places,  and  do  good  to  your  felveS 
firft  by  encreafing  your  Knowleag,  and  to  your  Neighbors  afterwards 
by  helping  their  Infirmities  ,  fome  fuch  I  hope  this  Nation  is  worthy 
of,  and  to  fuch  (hall  I  remain  a  Friend,  during  life,  readie  to  my  poor 
power  to  help. 


J\Qch.  Quip e per. 

Sfittle-felds  next  door 
to  the  red  Lyon. 

No'vetnb.  6. 1652. 

B  1  Authors 


Authors  made  ufe  of  in  this 

TREATISE. 


A 

jBgineta. 

aEuus. 

^rijlotle. 

^yicenna. 

^ycrrots, 

j{yenaris, 

jin^reo/S  (^dfdlpintis, 
^ntonm  SMufa^ 

B 

Bauhine. 

Bellus. 

!Bartholomem  J'nglus, 
Butler^  a  Manufcript. 

■A  C  , 

Qujim.  -  , 

QameraViti^ . 

Bodonem* 

Biof corides. 

E 

Dr.  Experience. 

F 

Fabius  Qolumna. 
Fuchjius, 

9 

Qefner, 

^alen. 

^errhard. 


IJldore, 

Johnfon, 

Leonicertis. 

Lohel. 

Lugdmenjis. 

Mathiolus. 

Mefue, 

Mi:^ldm, 


M 


0 


Otho  Brunfelfim. 

Barkinfon. 

Bliny. 

Bena. 

Blatearius, 

Bona. 

Dr.  B^afon. 
Bbu;^is. 

S 

Serapio. 

T 

Taberna  Montanm, 

TImphraJius, 

Turner. 

Tragus, 


.  I  ^ 

;  * 


A  Cata- 


/ 


A  Catalogue  of  the  Herbs  and  Plants  Sec.  in  this 
Treatife,  apropriated  to  their  feveral 


P  L  A  N  E  T  S, 

Vnder  Saturn  are^ 

Rupture-wort 

Red  Rofes 

Barley 

Rufhes 

Sage 

Red  Beets 

Solomons-Seal 

Sauce  alone,  or  Jack  bv  the 

Beech-tree 

Sarazens  Confound 

Hedg  ^ 

Bifoyl,  or  Twaybladc 

Service-tree 

Scurvy-grafs 

Birdsfoot 

Spleenwort,  or  Cetrach 

Succory 

Biftort,  or  Snakeweed 

Tamaris 

Our  Ladies  Thirties.  > 

Blewbottlcs 

MclancholIy-ThiRle 

-> 

Buckshorn-Plantane 

Blackthorn 

Vnder  Mars  are. 

Wild  Campions 

Throughwax 

• 

Pilewort 

Tutfan,  orParkleaves 

Arfefmart 

Cleavers,  orGoofgrafs 

Woad. 

Afarabacca 

Clowns  Woundwort 

Barberry-bufli 

Comfry 

Vttder  Jupiter 

Sweet  Bazil 

Cudweed,  orCottonweed 

Bramble^bufli 

Sciatica  Crefles 

Agrimony 

Briony 

Crofswort 

Alexanders 

Brooklime  n 

Darnel 

Afparagus 

Butchers-broom 

Doddar 

Avens 

Broom 

Epithimum 

B.^y-tree 

Broomrape 

Elm-tree 

White  Beets 

Crowfoot 

Ofmond  Royal 

Water-Bettony 

Cuckoopint,flr  Wake-Robin; 

Fleawort 

Wood-Bcttony 

Cranebil 

Flixweed 

Bilberries 

^otton-Thirtle 

Fumitory 

Borrage 

Flax-weed,  or  Toad-flax. 

Stinking  Gladwin 

Buglofs 

Furfebufti 

Goutwort 

Chervil 

Garlick 

Wintergreen 

Sweet  Cicely 

Hawthorn 

Haukweed 

Cinkfoyl 

Hops 

Hemlock 

Coftmary,  or  AlccoR 

Naddir 

Hemp 

Dandelyon 

Marterwort  '  5 

Henbane 

Docks 

Muftard 

Horftail 

Bloodwort 

Hedg-Murtard 

Knapweed 

Dog,  or  Quich-grafs 

Mettles 

Knotgrafs 

Endive 

Onions 

Medlar-tree 

Hartftongue 

Pepperwort,  or  Dittander 

Mofs 

Hyfop 

Carduus  Benedldus ,  in  the 

Mullein 

1  Houfleck,  or  Sengrden 

Epifile 

Nightibade 

1  Liverwort 

Rhadirti 

Polypodium 

Lungwort 

HorfeRhadifh 

Pophr-tree 

Sweet  Maudlin 

Rhubarb 

Quince-tree 

i  Oak-tree 

t 

1  Rapontick 

C  Bartard 

f  / 


A  CAtahoue  of  tie  H(rh 

Baftard  Rhubarb 

Cherry-tree 

Thiftles 

Winter  Cherries 

Star-thiftle 

Chickweed 

Tobacco 

Cichpeafe 

Wolly  Thiftle 

Clary 

Treacle  Muftard 

Cocks- head 

Michridate  Muftard 

Coltsfoot 

Wold,Weld,or  Dyers  Weed. 

Cowflips 

Wormwood. 

Dailies 

Devils. bit 

Vndcr  the  Sxxn  are^ 

Elder 

DwarfElder 

Angelica 

Eringo 

Afh-trec 

Featherfew 

Bawm 

Figwort 

One-blade 

Filipendula 

Burnet 

Foxgloves 

Butter-bur 

Golden-rod 

Chamomcl 

Gromwel  ‘ 

Chelondine 

Groundfel 

Centaury 

Herb  Robert 

Eyebright 

Herb  Truelove 

St.  Johns  wort 

Kidneywort 

Lovage 

Ladies  Mantle 

Marigolds 

Mallows 

Mifleto 

Marlh-Mallows 

Peony 

Mercury  • 

St.  Peters  wort 

Mints 

Pimpernel 

Motherwort 

'Rofa  Solis 

Mugwort 

Rofemary 

Nep,  Catmint 

Rhue 

Parfnip 

Saffron 

Peach-tree 

Tormentil 

Pear-tree 

Turnfole,  V  Heliotropium 

Penyroyal 

Vipers  Buglofs 

Perewinkle 

Walnut-tree 

Plantanc 

Plum-tree 

Vndcr  Venus  are^ 

Primrofes 

Ragwort 

Alehoof,  or  Ground-Ivy 

Rocket 

Black  Alder-tree 

Winter-Rocket 

Alder-Tree 

Damask  Roles 

Apple-tree 

Wood  Sage 

Stinking  Arrach  , 

Sanicle 

Arch-Angel,  or  Dead  Nettles 

Selfheal 

Beans 

Sopewort,  orBnuU 

Ladies  Bedftraw 

Sorrel 

Birch-tree 

Wood  Sorrel 

Biftiops  Weed 

Sowthiftles 

Elites 

Spignel 

Bugle 

Strawberries 

Burdock 

Garden  Tanfy 

Wild  Tanfy,  or  Silver-weed 
Teazles 
Vervain 
Vine- tree 
Violets 
Wheat 
Yarrow. 

Fff4er  Mercury  are^ 

Calamintb  ,  or  Mountain 
Mint 
Carrots 
Carraway 
Dill 

Elicampanc 

Fern 

Fennel 

Hogs  Fennel 

Germander 

Hazel  Nut-tree 

Horehound 

Houndftongue 

Lavender 

Liquoris 

Wall-Rhue 

Maidenhair 

Golden  Maidenhair 

Sweet  Marjoram 

Melilot 

Moneywort 

Mulberry-tree 

Oats 

Parfley 

Cow  Parfnep 

Pellitory  of  the  Wall 

Groundpine,  e^'Chamepitys, 

Reft-Harrow,  or  Chamock 

Sampire 

Summer  and  winter  Sa.vory 
Scabious 
Smallage 
Southernwood 
Meadow  Trefoyl 
Garden  Valerian 
Woodbind ,  or  Honcy-Suc- 
kles. 

Ffider  the  Moon  are. 


Adders  Tongue 

Cabbages 

Coleworts 


Sea 


a^ropriated  to  thtlr fsVeral  Tlctnets. 


Sea  Coleworts 

Water-Lillies 

Privet 

Columbines 

Loofeftrife,  with,  and  with- 

Rattle-grafs 

VVatercrefTes 

outfpiked  Heads 

White  Rofes 

Duckmeat 

Moonwort 

White  Saxifrage 

yellow  Waterflag 

Moufear 

Burnet  Saxifrage 

flower-de-luce 

Orpine 

Wall-flowers,  or  Wintcr-gi 

fluellin 

Poppies 

liflowers 

Ivy 

Purflain 

Willow-tree 

Lettice  j 

■  A 

C  z 


The 


...J 


J'l  i 


n 


-  fl  ^  III  A 


Ihc'Hcmesojjiyeial  SccKs pintcd Ij  Peter  Cole^^itih  fomjtle 
ting  ^rej^ in  Qornhill,  h)  the  txthenge,  Louden. 


Four  fivcral  Books,  ijNich.  CdpcperjCt;?/.  Sindtm 
ifi  Fhyfick  o/jd  Afliolcgy. 


»  A  P  H  Y  s 1 c  A  1  Directory:  Or  a 

jr\  Trar.flaticn  cf  the  T>ijpc7ifalo'iy,  made  by  the 
Colledg  oi  FhyCtians  of  Loftdvtu  V\  htTcimto  is  ad¬ 
ded,  The  lycy  to  Galen’i  <^hihcd  vf  Thyfitk’ 

2  A  D  I  R  E  c  T  o  R  Y  for  fFilidyph'CS  j  or  a  Guide 


for  omtn- 

3  An  Ephemeris  for  the  year  1651.  Amplified 
with  Rational  F'ledidiions  from  the  Bock  of  the  Crea- 
turci.  1  Of  the  State  of  the  Year.  2  VV  hat  may  pro¬ 
bably  betheefitdts  of  the  Cenjundfionof  Sa-Utrn  and 
Ma'is,  July  5>.  1650.  m  Scotland,  Holland,  Zealand, 
T e’l'k.')  ArrdU'idarn,  and  about  what  time  they  m.ay 

probably  happen.  To  which  is  joyned,  An^Aftrologo- 
FhyJhalVijcou'if  of  the  Humane  Vertues  in  the  Body 


ojitl  an. 

4.  Gaeens  Art  oe  Physickj  wherein  is  laid 
down, 

1.  A  Dtferiptien  of  Bodies,  Healthful, Unhealthful, 
and  Neutral. 

a.  Signs  of  good  and  bad  Conflitutiens. 

CHot, 

JCold, 

^,T)yy, 

I  being  {  Mcijf 
too  CHot  and  dry, 
^Hot  and  mot  (I, 
“Scold  and  diy, 
CCeld  and  moift. 


5.  Signs 
of  the* 


.Brain, 
'Heart, 

)  Liver, 
:Tc(ficles, 
dTcmpe'iaturc. 

'  Lungues, 
)Stomach^&i  . ' 


4.  Signs  and  Caufts  of  Steknefs. 

Tranflated  into  Englilh_  and  laigely  Commented  cnl' 
!  Together  w  ith  convenient  Medicines  for  all  particu¬ 
lar  Diftempers  of  the  Pans,  a  Deferiptien  of  the 
Complexion,  their  Conditions,  and  what  Diet  and 
Exercife  is  fittefl  for  them. 


A  Godly  and  Fruitful  Expeftion,  on  the  firfi  Epifllc  of 
Teter^  By  Mr.  John  "Biegers,  Minifter  of  the  Word  of 
God  at  Dedham  in  Effex- 

The  Wonders  of  the  Lo/rc/-y?ow,  by  Mr.  Samuel  M'ard 
of  Ipjwich. 

An  Expofitmi  ©Atke  Gofpel  of  the  Evangelift  St. 
ihew’.  %Mr.  ...  - 

CloTvs  Chirurgery. 

Marks  ©f  Salvation. 

Chriftians  Engagement  for  the  Gofpel,  by  John  Good¬ 
win. 

Great  Church  Ordinance  of  Baptifm. 

Mr.  Lo-ue’s  Cafe,  containing  his  Petitions,  Narrative, 
and  Speech. 

Vox  Pacifica,  or  a  Perfwafive  to  Peace. 

Dr.  Preftons  Saints  fubmifTion,  and  Satans  Overthrew. 

Pious  macs  practice  in  Parliament  Time. 

A  Treatife  of  the  Rickets,  being  a  Difeaie  common  to 
Children;  Wherein  is  ftiewed,  i.  The  Eflence,  2. 
The  Caufes,  3.  The  Signs,  4*  The  Remedies  of 
the  Dileafe.  Publifbed  in  Latin  by  Dr.  Glijfen,  Dr. 


I  Bate,  and  Dr.  Kegemorter. 

I  Mr.  Symjens  Seim  on  at  Wtfiminflcr. 
j  Mr.  Peaks  Stinicn  before  the  Lord  Major. 

I  Phillips  Treatife  of  Elell. 
i— - of  Chrifis  Geneolcgy. 

Seven  B  ooks  of  Jeremiah  Burroughs  lately  publi- 
fited'.  As  alfo  the  Texts  of  Scripture  upon 
which  they  arc  grounded. 

1  The  Rare  Jewel  of  Chriflian  Contentment,  cn  Phil. 
4.  1 1.  Whciin  is  fhcw'cd,  i.  VV  hat  Contentment  is, 
2;  Itisaiiholv  Artand  Myflery,  3.  Tlic  Excellen¬ 
cies  of  it,  4.  The  Evil  of  the  contrary  lin  of  Alur- 
muring,  and  the  Aggravations  of  it. 

^  Ge^el-noffnp,  on  Levit.  to.  z-  Wherin  is  flicwed, 
I.  The  right  manner  of  the  Woifliip  of  God  in  ge- 
neialj  and  particularly,  Jn  Hearing  the  Word,  Re¬ 
ceiving  the  Lords  Supper,  and  Prayer. 

S  Cojpel-Converfation,,  cn  Phil.  i.  17.  Wherin  js 
Ihcwed,  I.  That  the  Converfations  of  Belecvcrs 
mult  be  above  what  could  be  by  the  Light  of  Nature 

2  Beyond  thefe  that  lived  under  the  Law,  3.  And 
futable  to  what  Truths  the  Gofpel  holds  forth.  To 
vv'hkh  is  added.  The  Mifery  of  thofe  Men  that  have 
their  Tertionm  this  Life  cnly,  cn  Pfal.  17.  14. 

4  A  Trcatik  of  P arthiy-mindtdnef.  Wherin  is  ll’c- 
wee,  I  VVhat  Earthly-mindcdnefs  is,  2  The  great 
Evilthercf,  on  Phil.  i.  part  of  tbe  157.  Verf.  Alio 
to  the  Irme  Beck  is  joyned,  A  Treatife  of  HcavenN- 
mindcdnef?,  and  walking  with  God,  cn  Gen.  5.  24. 
,-Sna  cn  Phil.  3.20. 

5r  An  Sxpofition,  cn  the  feurth,  fifth,  fixth,  and  ftventh 
v-liaptcis  of  the  Prcphefic  ct  Hofea. 

6  An  Exp ofiti on  bn  the  eighth,  ninth,  and  tenth  Chap¬ 
ters  of  Hofea.  ^ 

7  An  Expofmon  cn  the  clcvcnih,twclfth,and  thiiteenth 
Chapters  of  Ho/c (7. 

The  Ccinpaflionate  ^Samaritan. 

Twelve  f  ever al  Bocks  of  Mr.  William  Bridg,  ColUacd 
into  one  Volirmn.  Vii. 

1  The  great  Gofpel- My  fiery  of  the  Saints  Comfort 
and  Holinefs ,  opened  and  applied  from  Civrifls  ■ 
Priefily  Office, 

2  Satans  Powcf  to  Tempt  3  and  Chrifis  Love  to, and 
Care  of  His  People  under  Temptation. 

3  Thankfulnefs  required  in  every  Condition. 

4  Grace  ioi  Grace  ;  or,  the  Overflowings  of  Chrifis 
Ev.lncfs  received  by  all  Saints. 

5  1  he  Spiiitunl  Actings  cf  Faith,  through  Natural 
Impcfiibilitics. 

6  Evangelical  Repentance. 

7  The  Spiritual-Life,  and  In-Being  of  Chrift  in  all 
Ecleevers. 

8  The  Woman  of  Canaan. 

9  The  Saints  Hiding-Place  in  time  cf  Gods  Anger, 
ip  Chrifis  Coming  is  at  cur  Midnight. 

1 1  A  Vindicaticii  cf  Ordinances. 

12  Grace  and  Love  leycnd  Gifts. 

Cum  mult  is  all  is — 


Er^lifti  Phy( 


itiaa 


Womds  in 

the  Breafti 

Bowehy 

Vomiting, 

Bleeding, 

Terms 

pops, 

fvhites^ 

Wounds, 

itlcers,Inr 

flamAti- 

ons  in 

Wounds. 


Adders  Tongue. 


Vefcription- 

tAA;^AAHisfmallHerb  hath  but  one 
Leaf  j  which  grows  with  the 
T  Stalk  a  fingers  length  above 
^4*’  the  grounds  being  fatj  and 

of  a  freih  green  colours  broad 

like  the  Water  plantane  (but 
lefs)  without  any  middle  Rib  in  it  i  from  the 
botwm  of  which  Leaf  on  the  infidcs.  rifeth  up 
(ordinarily)  one,  fomtimes  two,  or  three 
foiall  flender  ftalksj  the  upper  half  wherof  is 
fomwhat  bigger,  and  dented  with  final  round 
dents  of  a  yellowiih  green  colour,  like , the 
Tongue  of  an  Adder  or  Serpent  (only  this  is 
as  ufeful  as  they  are  foroiidable)  The  Root 

continues  all  the  year. 

Vlace. 


It  growcth  in  moift  Meadowsjand  fuch  like 
places. 

tim. 

^  And  is  to  be  found  in  April  and  M-A’j,  tor  it 
tjuickly  peritheth  with  a  little  heat. 

Vertues  And  Ufe. 

It  is  temperate,  in  refpeft  ofheat,  but  dry 
in  the  Second  Decree.  The  Juyce  of  the 
Leaves  drunk  with  the  diftilled  Water  of 
Horftail  isafingular  Remedy  for  all  manner 
of  vvounds  in  the  Breaft,  Bowels,or  other  parts 
of  the  Bodyjand  is  given  with  good  fuccefs  un¬ 
to  thofe  who  are  troubled  with  Calling,  Vo¬ 
miting,,  or  bleeding  at  the  Mouth  or  Nofe,  or 
otherwife  downwards.  The  faid  Juyce  given 
in  the  diftilled  Water  of  Oaken  Buds  is  very 
good  forWomcn  who  have  their  ufualCoiirfes, 
or  theWhites  flowing  down  too  abundantly.  It 
hdps  fore  Eyes.  The  Leaves  infufed  or  boy- 
led  in  Oyl  Omphacinc,  or  unripe ,  Olives  fet 
in  the  Sun  for  cenain  daies,  or  the  green 
Leaves  fufficiently  boyled  in  the  faid  Ovl,  is 
made  an  excellent  green  Balfom,  not  only  for 
green  and  frelh  Wounds,  but  alfo  for  old  and 
inveterate  Ulcers,  efpecially  if  a  little  fine 


clear  Turpentine  be  diflblved  therin:  It  alfo 
ftayeth  and  repreffeth  all  inflamations  that  a- 
rife  upon  pains,  by  Hurts,  or  Wounds. 

It  is  an  Herb  under  the  Dominion  of  the 
Moon  in  Cancer,  and  therfore  if  the  weakneis 
of  theRententive  Faculty  be  caufed  by  an  evil 
influence  of  SatM'n,  jn  any  part  of  the  Body 
governed  by  the  Moon,  or  under  the  Domini¬ 
on  of  Cancer,  this  Herb  cures  it  by  Sympathy: 
It  cures  thofe  Difeafes  before  fpecified  in  any 
part  of  the  Body  under  the  influence  of  Sa¬ 
turn,  by  Antypathy. 

What  parts  of  the  Body  arc  under  each  Pla¬ 
net  and  Sign,  and  alfo  what  Difeafes  may  be , 
found  in  my  Aftrological  Judgment  of  Dif^ 
cafes,  and  for  the  internal^Work  of  Natufe  in 
the  Body  of  Man,  as  Vital,  Animal,Natural, 
and  Procreative  Spirit  of  Man,  The  Appre- 
henfion.  Judgment,  Memory,  the  external 
Scnces,  vi'K^  Seeing,  Hearing,  Smelling,  Ta¬ 
iling,  and  Peelings  the  Vertues,  Attradive, 
Retentive,  Digeftive,  Expulfive  &c.  under 
the  Dominion  of  what  Planets  they  are,  may 
be  found  in  my  Sphemeru  for  the  yeer  x6^  i. 
in  both  which  you  lhall  find  the  Chaff  of  Au¬ 
thors  blown  away  by  the  Fame  of  Dr  ’l^eajon, 
and  nothing  but  Rational  Truths  left  for  the 
Judgment  of  the  Ingenious  to  feed  upon. 

Laftly,  To  avoid  blotting  Pajper  with  one 
thing  many  times,  and  alfo  to  eafe  your  Purfes 
in  the  price  of  the  Book,  and  withal  to  make 
you  Studious  in  Phyfick,  you  have  at  the  latter 
end  of  the  Book,  the  way  of  preferving  all' 
Herbs  either  in  Juyce,  Conferve  Oyl,  Oynt- 
ment,  or  JPlaifter,  Eleduary  Pill  or  Troches. 


Agrimony. 


Veferipdon. 


THis  hath  diverf  long  leaves 

fome  fmallerjfet  upon  a  Stalk,all  of  them 
dented  about  the  edges',  grcci;  above,  at^ 
'D  "  grayilh 


z 


The  Englijh  Thyjltian. 


■  t 

I 


grayifli  underneath,  and  a  little  hairy  withal : 
Among  which  arifeth  up  4ifHalIy,  but  one 
ftrongi  round,  hairy,  brown  Stalk,  two  or 
three  Foot  high,  with  fmaller  Leaves  fethere 
and  there  upon  it,  at  the  top  whcrof  grow  ma¬ 
ny  fmal  yellow  Flowers  one  above  another  in 
lon^  Spikes  t  after  which  come  rough  heads  of 
Seeds  hanging  downwards  which  wil  cleave  to 
and  flick  upon  Garments  or  any  thing  that 
lhal  rub  againfl  them.  The  Root  is  black, 
long,  and  fomwhat  woody,abiding  many  yeers 
and  fliooting  afrefli  every  Spring  which  Root, 
though  fmal  hath  a  reafonable  good  feent. 

Place. 

It  groweth  Upon  Banks  near  the  fldes  of 
Hedges,  or -Pales. 

'  Time. 

And  it  Fiowfeth  in  July  and  /luguli.,  the 
Seed  being^ripc  ih  ortly  after. 

Hermes  and  ufti. 

€lenfini3  It  is  of  a  clenfing  and  cutting  faculty  with- 
Vryingi  oht  any  manifeft'heat,  moderately  drying  and 
Bindings  binding  5  It  openeth  and  clenlcth  the  Liver, 
Liver,  helpeth  the  Jaundice,  and  is  very  beneficial  to 
Jaundice,  Bowels,  healing  all  inward  Wotmds,Erui- 
Jnward  ^€*3  Hurts,  and  other  diftempers.  The  Deco- 
fVounds,  ^ion  of  the  Ha  b  made  with  Wine  and  drunk 
Inward  «  good  againfl  the  flinging  and  biting  of  Ser- 
Bruifes,  P^ftts,  and  helps  them  that  have  foul,  trou- 
Bloody  bled,  or  bloody  waters,  and  makes  them  pifs 
and  troti-  %cdily ,  It  alfo  helpeth  the  •Chollick, 
bled  Urin,  the  Breafl,  and  rids  away  the  Cot^h. 

ChoUicli,  A  dta^ht  of  theDeco^iott  tjdteti  warm  before 
Breafi,  *hc  Fttj.firfl;  removes,  and  in  time  rids  away 
Cough,  tbc  TeSfiatt or Q&atfan  Agues:  The  Leaves 
Tertian  and  S<cd  taken  in  Wine,  ftayetb  the  BIoo^ 
emd^xl-  Outwardly  applied,  being  ftamped  with 

tanAgues,  Swines  greafe,  it  helpcthold  fores,  Can- 
Bloody  cew,  and  inveterate  ttkers  i  and  draweth  forth 
Flux,  Ul-  Thorns,  Splinters  of  Wood,  MaHsi  or  any 
cers.  Can-  thing  gotten  into  the  Flelh  j  it  bcl- 

cers,  to  flarengtheft  the  Members  that  be  out  of 

Thorne,  jo)^t  5  ^  bruifed  and  applied,  or  the 
Splinters  Joyce  dropped  in,  it  helpeth  foul  and  impofl- 

and  Nails  brnredEms. 

inltheflejj  The  diftdled  Water  of  the  Herb  is  good  to 
Members  blithe  faid  pttrpTcde^,  either  inward  or  out- 
outfif  wdrd,  buc  a  great  deal  weaker. 
joynt ,  A-  '  it is-m  Herb,  under and  the  Sign 
pofthumes^  and  therforeflrengthehs  thofe  parts 
under  that  Planet  and  Sign,  md  removes  iJif- 
cafeiinthemby  Sympathy,  and  thofe  under 
Saturn,  Mar^,  ittd  Mercury,  by  Antipathy. 
If  they  li^pen  in  any  part  of  the  Body  gover- 
inedyy  Jupiter,  or  uiider  ihe  Signs,  Cancer^, 
Sagitary,  or  Pifees,  and  therfpre  muft  needs 
be  good  for  th^Gout,  eitljtT  nfed  outwardly 
in  anOylor  Oyntment,  or  inwardly  in  an 
Eleauary  or  Syrup,  orconcreated  juyee,  for 
which  fee  the  latter  end  of  the  Book. 

Itisa  mofl  admirable  remedy  for  fiacH 
whofcLiverj  are  annoyed  either  by  heat  or 
cold.  The  is  the  former  of  Blood,  and 


Blood  the  Nourifher  of  the  Body,  and.  Agri- 
mony  and  Strengthner  of  the  Liver. 

I  cannot  fland  to  give  you  a  Reafon  in  eve¬ 
ry  Herb  why  it  cureth  fuch  Difeae(s,but  if  you 
plcafc  to  perufe  my  Judgment  in  the  Herb 
Wormwoc«l  you  fliall  find  them  there,  and  it 
will  be  well  worth  your  while  to  confider  it  m 
every  Herb,  you  Ihall  find  therri  true  through¬ 
out  the  Book. 

AJehooi^  or  Ground-Ivy. 

DefciiptioH. 

THis  well  known  Herb,  lieth,  fpreadeth, 
and  creepeth  upon  the  ground,  {hooting 
forth  Roots,  at  the  corners  of  the  tender  joyn- 
ted  Stalks,  fet  all  along  with  two  round  Leavs 
at  every  Joynt,  fomwhat  hairy,  crumpled,  and 
unevenly  dented  about  the  edges  with  round 
dents :  at  the  Joynrs  likewifc  with  the  Leaves 
towards  the  end  of  the  Branches  come  forth 
hollow  long  Flowers  of  a  blewifh  Purple  co¬ 
lour  with  fmall  white  fpots  upon  the  lips  that 
hang  down :  The  Root  is  fmal  with  fcings. 
Place. ' 

It  is  commonly  found  under  Hedges,  and 
on  the  udes  of  Ditches,  under  Houfes,  or  in 
fhadowed  Lanes,  and  other  waft  groimds  in 
almoft  every  part  of  the  Land. 

Time. 

Tfidy  FIowcv  fomwhat  early,  and  abktefo 
a  gveat  while  j  the  Leaves  continue  green  un- 
tiU  Winter,  aftd  fomthftes  abide,  except  ,thc 
Winter  be  very  lharp  and  cold. 

Venues  and  ufe. 

It  IS  quick,  fharp,  and  bitter  in  ta^  and  is 
therby  found  to  be  hot  and  dry,  a  fingular 
Herb  for  all  inward  Wounds,  exulcerated 
Lungs,  or  other  parts,  cither  by  it  fclf  or  boy- 
led  with  other  the  like  Herbs :  And  being 
drunk,  it  in  fhort  time  eafeth  all  griping 
Pains ,  Win^  and  Chollerick  Humors  in 
the  Stomach,  ^Iccn,  or  Belly :  helps  the  ycl* 
low  Jaundice  by  opening  the  ftoppings  of  the 
Gaid  and  Liver,  and  Mdancholly  by  opening 
the  flowings  of  the  Spleen,  expeileth  Venom 
or  Poylon,  and  alfo  the  Plague,  it  provoketh 
Urin,  and  Womens  Courfes.  The  Decocti¬ 
on  of  it  in  Wine  drunk  for  fome  time  toge¬ 
ther  pmeoretheafl  unto  them  that  are  trou¬ 
bled  with  the  or  Hip  Gout,  ^  alfo 

the  Gout  in  the  Hands,  Knees,  or  Feet ;  and 
if  you  put  to  the  DecoAion,  fome  Honey,  and 
a  little  Burnt  Alhan,  it  is  excellent  good  to 
gargle  any  fote  Mouth  or  Thpoaf,ana  to  walh 
the  Sores  and  Ulcers  in  the  privy  parts  of  man 
or  woman :  It  ^ecdily  healeth  green  Wounds 
being  bruiftil  and  bound  therunto:  Thejuyee 
of  it  boyled  with  a  little  Hcny  &  Verdiereef, 
doihwondetftdlydcnf  FiftvJa's,  Ulcers,  and 

flayeth 


Inward 
Wounds, 
PainsGrfi- 
ping^yind 
ChoUer, 
Stomach, 
Spleen, 
Belly^op- 
pingin^ 
Liver,Gal 
Plague, 
'Voyfon, 
Co»t,Sci^ 
atka,  fort 
Mouth  ^ 
Throat, 
Ulcers  in 
theFntd- 
tiet,  mb, 
Scabejtt'eb 
in  the  Bye 
Rednef&‘ 
watrkgof 
them,  ul¬ 
cers,  rmje 
in  theEers 
Deafns^, 


3 


The  Englijh  Thyjitian, 


ftayeth  the  fpreading  or  eating  of  Cancers  and 
Ulcersj  It  helpeth  the  Itch,  Scabs,  Wheals, 
and  other  breakings  out  in  any 
Body,  The  Juyce  of  Celondine,  Fiela  Day- 
fics,  and  Ground-Ivy  clarified,  and  a  little  fine 
Sugar  diflblvcd  therm  and  dropped  into  the 
Eyes  is  a  Sovereign  Remedy  for  all  the  Pains, 
Rednefs,  and  Watering  of  them  >  as  alfo  for 
the  Pin  and  Web,  Skins,  and  Films  growing 
over  the  Sight  J  It  helpeth  Beafts  as  well  as 
Men  j  The  Juyce  dropped  into  thc.Ears  doth 
wonderfully  help  the  noife  and  finging  of 
them,  and  helpeth  the  Hearing  which  is  de¬ 
cayed.  It  is  good  to  Tun  up  with  new  Drink, 
for  it  will  fo  clarifie  it  in  a  night,  that  it  will 
be  the  fitter  to  be  Srunk  the  next  morning  5 
or  if  any  Drink  be  thick  with  removing  or  a- 
ny  other  accident,  it  will  do  the  like  in  a  few 
houi:s> 

It  is  an  Herb  of  VenuSi  and  therfore  cures 
her  Difeafes,by  Sympathy,  and  thofe  of  Mars 
by  Antipathy  j  how  to  preferve  it  all  the  yeer 
you  ftnll  find  at  the  latter  end  of  the  Book. 

Alexander. 

Defiription- 

IT  is  ufually  fown  in  all  the  Gardens  in  Eti~ 
rope,  and  fo  well  known,  that  it  needs  no 
further  Defcription. 

Tim. 

They  Flower  in  June  and  July,  and  the 
Seed  is  ripe  in 

Venues  and  ufe* 

Oh^rutii-  It  warmcth  a  cold  Stomach,  and  opcneth 
ms  of  the  Hoppings  of  the  Liver  and  Spleen,  it  is  good 
Liv^f  and  to  move  Womens  Courfes,  to  expel  the  Af- 
Spleen,  ter-birth,  to  break  Wind,  to  provoke  Urine, 
provokes  and  help  the  Strangury  j  and  thefe  things  the 
ehe  Terms  Seeds  wil  do  likewife,  if  cither  of  them  be 
Afterbirth  boyled  in  Wine,  or  being  bruifed  and  taken  in 
wind,  pro-Wine,  it  is  alio  efFeftuaiagainft  the  biting  of 
vo^es  U-  Serpents.  And  now  .you  know  whatj  Alexan- 
n«,  der  Porredg  which  is  fo  familiar  in  this  City 
of  Ser-  is  good  for,  that  you  may  no  longer  eat  it  out 
fents,  of  ignorance  but  out  of  knowledg. 

The  Black  Alder-Tree. 

Defcription. 

THis  Tree  feldom  groweth  to  any  ^eat 
bignefs,  but  for  the  moft  part  abideth 
like  a  Hedg,  Bufh,  or  Tree  fprcj^ng  into 
Branches,  the  Wood  of  the  Body  being  white, 
and  of  a  dark,  red  Core  or  Heart  j  the  out¬ 
ward  Bark  is  of  a  bUckiih  colour,  with  many 
white  fpots  theron :  but  the  inner  Bark  next 
I 


unto  the  Wood  is  yellow,  which  being  cjiew- 
ed  will  turn  the  Spittle  neer  unto  a  Saffron 
colour.  The  Leaves  are  fomwhat  like  thofe 
of  the  ordinary  Alder-Tree,  or  the  Fcemale 
Cornel,  or  Dogberry- Tree,  called  in  Sufjtx 
Dog-wood,  but  blacker,  and  not  fo  long.  The 
Flowers  are  white,  coming  forth  with  the 
Leaves  at  the  Joynts,  which  turn  into  final 
round  Berries,  firft  grcen,afterwards  red,  but 
blackifh  when  they  are  through  ripe,divided  as 
it  were  into  two  parts,  wherin  is  contained 
two  final  round  and  flat  Seeds:  The  Root 
runneth  not  deep  into  the  Ground,  but  fprea- 
deth  rather  under  the  upper  cruft  of  the 
Earth, 

"Place. 

This  Tree  or  Shrub  may  be  found  plenti¬ 
fully  in  St.  Johns  Wood  by  Hornfey,,  and  in 
the  Woods  upon  Hamfled. Heath  j  as  alfo  at  a 
Wood  called  the  old  Park.in  Sarcomb  in  Suf- 
fex,  neer  the  Brooks  fide. 

Time. 

It  Flowreth  in  May,  and  the  Berries  are 
ripe  inSeptember. 

Vertues  andufe. 

The  inner  yellowBark  herof  pnrgeth  down¬ 
wards  both  Choller  &  Flegm,&  the  watry  hu¬ 
mors  of  fuch  as  have  the  Dropfie,  andftreng-  C  holler, 
theneth  the  inward  parts  again  by  binding.  If  Plegjn. 
the  Bark  hereof  be  boyled  with  Aerimony, 
JVormwood,  Ttodder,  Hops,  and  feme  Fennel, 
with  Smalledg,  Sndive,  and  Succory  T(oots, 
and  a  reafonable  draught  taken  every  morning 
for  fome  time.together,  it  is  veryeffe^hial  a-  .  \ 

gainft  the  Jaundice,  Dropfie,  and  the  evil  di-  JauAdicei 
Ipofition  of  the  Body ,  efpecially  if  fome  fu-  Dropfy, 
table  purging  Medicine  have  been  taken  be-  Cachexia^ 
fore  to  avoid  the  groffer  excrements  j  It  Liver, 
purgeth  and  ftrengthencth  the  Liver  and  Spleen. 
Spleen,  clenfing  them  from  fuch  evil  humors, 
and  hardnefs  as  they  are  afflicted  with :  It  is 
to  be  underftood  that  thefe  things  are  perfor¬ 
med  by  the  dryed  Bark ,  for  the  frefh  green 
Bark  taken  inwardly  provoketh-ftrong  Vomi¬ 
tings,  pains  in  the  Stomach,  and  gripings  iit 
the  Belly:  Yet  if  the  Deco ftion  may  Hand 
and  fettle  two  or  three  dales  until  the  yellow 
colour  be  changed  black,  it  will  not  work  fo 
Hrongly  asbcforCjbutwillHrengthcnthe  Sto-  Stomath 
mach,  and  procure  an  Appetite  to  Meat.  The  A-' 

outer  Bark  contrarywife  doth  bind  the  Body,  petite  le[l, 
and  is  helpful  for  ail  Lasks  and  Fluxes  therof,  Flux,  Lice 
but  this  muH  alfo  be  dried  firH,  wherlw  it  wil  Itch, Scabs 
work  the  better.  The  inner  Bark  herot  boyled  Tooth-ach 
in  Vineger,  is  an  approved  remedy  to  VlM  Teeth  loo  f. 
Lice,  to  cure  the  ltch,  and  take  away  Scabs  by 
drying  them  up  in  a  fhort  time :  Tt  is  fingu- 
lar  good  to  wafh  the  Teeth,  to  take  away  the 
Pains,  to  faHen  tSofe  that  are  loof,  to  denf 
them,  and  keep  them  found.  The  Leaves  are 
good  Fodder  for  Kine  to  make  them  giv^ 
more  Milk. 

If  in  the  %>ring  time  you  ufc  the  Herbs  be- 
D  i  ^  fore 


4 


The  Englijh  ^hyfitian. 


ftire  mentioned  and  will  but  take  a  handful  of 
each  of  thttn^  and  to  them  ad  a  handful  of  El¬ 
der  Budsj  and  having  bruifed  them  allj  boyl 
them  in  a  Gallon  of  ordinary  Beer  when  ’tis 
new,  and  having  boyled  them  half  an  hour, 
ad  this  to  three  Gallons  more,  and  let  them 
wotk  together,  and  drink  a  draught  of  it  every 
morning,  half  a  pint  or  there  abouts  :  It  is  an 
excellent  Purge  for  the  Spring,  to  confume 
that  Flegmatick  quality  the  IVinter  hath  l^t 
behind  it,  and  withal  keep  your  Body  in 
health,  and  confume  thofe  evil  humors  which 
the  heat  of  Summer  .will  readily  ftir  up,efteem 
it  as  a  Jewel. 

4?^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^ 

The  Common  Alder-  . 
Tree. 

Defcrlpmn. 

GRowcth  to  a  reafonable  heighth,  and 
fpreads  much  if  it  like  the  place  j  It  is  fo 
gencFally  wel  known  unto  Country  People  that 
I  conceive  it  needlefs  to  tel  them  that  which  is 
aio  news. 

Tlace  avd  Tim^  ■ 

It  delighteth  to  grow  in  moift  Woods  and 
watry  places.  Flowring  in  or  and 
yeilding  ripe  Seed  in  September.  r 

Venues  and  Vfe.  I 

tootinv^  The  Leaves  and  Bark  of  the  '.Alder-Tree, 
are  cooling,  drying,  and  binding.  The  frefh- 
Leaves  laid  upon  fwellings,  diflolveth  them, 
and  ftaieth  the  Inflamation^j  The  Leaves 
^kas  *  ^  under  the  bare  Feet  gauled  with  travelling 
are  a  great  refreflting  to  them  :  The  faid 
Leaves  gathered  while  the  morning  dew  is  on 
them^  and  brought  into  a  Chamber  troubled 
with  Fleas,  wil  gather  them  thcrinto,  which 
being  fuddenly  caft  out  wil  rid  the  Chamber 
of  thofe  troublefom  Bed-fellows. 

It  is  a  Tree  under  the  Dominion  oi  Venus, 
andofiome  watry  Sign  or  other,  I  fuppofe 
Tifees,  and  therfore  the  Decoftion,  or  dillil- 
led  Water  of  the' Leaves  is  excellent  againfi 
Bw/aws ,  Burnings  5  and  Inflamation,  cither  with 
Infiam'a-  '  ...  .  •  . 

tims. 


Wounds  I  or  without,  to  bath  the  place  grieved 
with,  and  efpecially  for  that  inflamation  in 
the  Breaft  which  the  vulgar  call  an  Ague. 

If  you  cannot  get  the  Leaves,  as  in  Winter 
’tis  impoffible,  make  ufe  of  the  Bark  in  the 
fame  manner. 

Angelica.  j 

To  write  a  Defeription  of  that  which  is 
fowell  known  to  be  growing  [in  almoft 
mry  Cardenj  I  (uppofc  is  sdtogether;  nced-^ 

4 


lefs:  yet  for  its  Vertues  it  is  of  admirable 
ulc. 

In  times  of  Hcathenifm  when  men  had 
founU  cut  any  excellent  Herb  &c.  they  dedi¬ 
cated  it  to  their  gods,  As  the  Bcty-tice  to  A- 
poUo,  theO/?^  to  Jiipiltr,  the  Vine  to  Bac¬ 
chus,  the  Poplar  to  Hercules:  Thefe  the  Pa- 
pifis  following  as  their  Patriarchs,  they  dedi¬ 
cate  thet^  to  their  Saints,  as  cur  Ladies  Tin- 
/?/?  to  the  Blejjcd  Virpn,  ^t.  Johns  Wort  to  ♦ 

St.  John,  and  another  Wort  to  St.  Peter,  &c. 

Our  Phyfitians  muH  imitate  like  Apes, 

(though  they'cannot  ccme^ifFhalf  fo'  cleverly) 
for  they  Blalphcmoufly  call  Panfles,  or  Harts- 
eaf,  an  Herb  of  the  Trinity,  bccauf  it  is  of 
three  colours :  and  a  certain  Oyntment,  an 
Oymment  of  the  .Apoftles,  becauf  it  corfifteth 
of  twelve  Ingredients;  Alas  poor. Fools,  I 
am  forry  for  their  folly,  and  grieved  at  their 
Blafphemy  ;  God  fend  them  the  reft  of  their 
Age,  for  they  have  their  fliare  of  Ignorance 
already,  O  !  why  muft  oursbeBla^hemous 
becauf  the  Heathens  and  Papifts  were  Idolar 
trous  ?  certainly  they  have  lead  fo  much  in 
old  ruftie  Authors,  that  they  have  loft  all 
their  Decmity ,  for  unlefs  it  were  aiaongft 
tfie  Ranters,  I  never  read  or  heard  of  fuefa 
Blafphemy  :  The  Heathens  and  Papifts  were 
bad,  and  ours  worf,-  the  Papifts  giving  Idola¬ 
trous  Names  to  H«rbs  for  their  Vertues  lake, 
net  for  their,  fair-  looks;  and  therfore  feme 
called  this  an  Herb  of  the  Holy  Chofl,  others 
more  moderate  called  it  Angelica,  becauf  of  its 
Angelical  Vertues,  and  that  name  it  retains 
ftil^  and  all  Nations  follow  it  fo  near  as  their 
Dialed  will  permit. 

Vertues  end  fife. 

Itreflfts  Poyfon,  by  defending  andeemfor-  Toy  fen,' 

'  ting  the  Heart,  Blood,  and  Spirits;  it  doth  the  Penitence, 
like  againft  the  Plague,  and  all  Epidemical  Epidem- 
Difeafes  if  the  Root  be  takerrtn  peuder  to  the  cal  Hifea- 
waight  of  half  a  dram  at  a  time,  with  feme 
good  Triacle  in  Cardus  Water,  and  the  par¬ 
ty  therupon  laid  to  fweat  in  his  ■  Bed.  If 
Treacle  be  not  at  hand,  take  it  alone  in  Car- 
dusj  or  Angelica  Water.  The  Stalks  otRootj 
candied  and  eaten  falling,  are  good  Preferva- 
tives  in  time  of  Infedion ;  and  at  other  times 
to  warm  and  comfort  a-  cold  Stomach.  The 
Roo^alfofteepedin  Vinegcr,  and  a  little  of 
that  Vineger  taken  femtimes  f?fting,  and  the  . 

Root  fmellcd  unto  is  good  for  the  fame.put- 
pofe.  A  w^ater  diftilled  from  the  Root  lim¬ 
ply,  or  fteeped  in  Wine  and  diftillcd  in  daft, 

is  much  more  eficdual  than  the  Water  of  the 
Leaves  j  and  this  Water  drunk  two  or  three 
fpeonfuls  at  a  time,  cafeth  all  Pains  and  T oi-  Coldjs^htd 
ments  coming  of  Cold  and  Wind,  fo  as  the  PleutcJj, 
Body  be' not  bound:  and  taken  with  fcm.e  of  Cough,  | 
the  Root  in  Pouder  at  the  beginning  helpeth  Lungues,  ^ 
the  Plurefy,  as  alfo  all*  other  Difeafes  of  the  Breaft, 
Lungues  and  Breaft,  as  Coughs,  Phthilick,  Strangit/y, 
an^monnefs  of  Breath}  and  a  Syrup  of  the  Shormft 
• - -  -  Staib  of  Breath, 


ChoUtcl(, 
frovol{es 
theTerms, 
after  birth  3 
jioppings 
of  the  Li¬ 
ver  and 
Spleen,  In- 
digeftion, 
Sur- 

fetSyToothr 
achy  biting 
of  M ad- 
dogs. 


a  leer  S3 
Gouty  Sci¬ 
atica. 


Fainting 
Stomachy 
Loof  Bel¬ 
lies  yThir  ft: 
Flegm. 


Stomachy 

Bowelsy 

Vomiting: 


The  Englijh  Thyfitian. 


5 


Stalks  doth  the  like:  It  helps  pains  of  the  Col- 
lick,  the  Strangury,  and  ftoppihg  of  the  Urin, 
procureth  Womens  Courfesj  and  expelleth  the 
After-birth,  openeth  the  ftoppings  of  the  Li¬ 
ver  and  Spleen,  and  briefly  eafeth  and  difeuf- 
feth  al  windinefs  and  inward  fwcllings.  The 
Decoftion  drunk  before  the  fit  of  an  Ague, 
that  they  may  fwcat  (if  poflible)  before  the  fit 
come,  wil  in  two  or  three  times  taking  rid  it 
quite  away  :  It  helps  digeftion,  andds^  reme¬ 
dy  for  a  Surfet.  The  Juy^e  or  the  Watpr  be¬ 
ing  dropped  into  the  Eyes  or  Ears,  help^  dim- 
nels  of  fight  and  deafnefs :  The  juyee  put  in¬ 
to  the  hoUow  Teeth,  eafeth  their  pains.  The 
Roots  in  Pouder  made  up  into  a  Plaiiler  with 
a  little  Pitch}  and  laid  on  the  biting  of  a  mad- 
Dog,  or  any  other  venemous  creature  j  doth 
wonderfully  help  :  The  Juyee  or  the  Water 
dropped ,  or  tents  wet  therin,  and  put  into  old 
filthy  deep  Ulcers,  Or  the  Pouder  of  the  Root 
(in  want  of  eitherj  doth  clenfand  caufthem 
to  heal  quickly,  by  covering  the  naked  Bones 
withPlcfhiThe  diftilledWater  applied  to  places 
pained  with  the  Gout  or  Sciatica,  doth  give  a 
great  deal  of  cafe. 

The  wild  Angelica  is  not  fo  effedlual  as  the 
Garden,  ^though  it  may  be  fafly  ufed  to  al  the 
purpofes  aforefaid. 

It  is  an  Herb  of  the  San  in  Leo  5  let  it  be 
gathered  when  he  is  there,  the  ^oon  applying 
to  his  good  Afpea  }  let  it^be  gathered  either 
5n  his  hour,  or  in  the  hour  of  Jupiter,  let  Sol 
be  angular.  Obferve  the  like  in  gathering  the 
Herbs  of  other  Plants,and  you  may  happen  do 
wonders.  In  al  Epidemical  Difeales  caufed  by 
Saturn  this  is  as  good  a  Prefervative  as  grows. 

Apples*  r- 

A  Word  or  two  of  the  moft  ufual  kinds  of 
Apples,  though  the  C oiled g  of  P hyfitians 
make  ufe  of  none  but  fuchas  Vulgo  vulgati, 
Pearmains,  vel  Pippins. 

Apples  in  general  are  cold  and  windy,  and 
being  of  fundry  tails,  Galen  Ibeweth  thereby 
how  to  diftinguilh  them :  Som  have  1  lharp 
tall,  and  arc  good  for  fainting  Stomachs  and 
loof  Bellies  }  others  fowr,  good  to  cool  and 
-  quench  thirftj  fom  lharp,fit  to  cut  grofs  flegm} 
,  fom  fwcet,  fo@n  deftributed  in  the  Body,  and 
as  foon  paired  away,  yet  fooner  corrupted  i.t 
the  Stomach  if  they  be  ftaid  :  The  bell  forts 
before  they  be  throughly  ripe  are  to  be  avoi¬ 
ded  j.  then  to  be  roafled  or  fcalded  is  the  bell 
way  to  take  them,  and  a  little  Spice  or  Seeds 
call  upooihem  and  taken  after  meat,  do  llren- 
then  both  Stopiach  and  Bowels,  efpecially  in 
thofethat  loath, or  hardly  digell  their  meat,  or 
^  are  given  to  calling,  or  have  a  Flux  or  Lask : 
Thole  that  are  a  little  fowr  and  harlh  ufed  in 


that  manner  arc  fittcll:  Sweet  Apples  loofen  Flux,  loo- 
the  Belly  and  drive  forth  Worms  5  Sowr  Ap-  (cUyiVorms  . 
pies  flop  the  Belly,  and  provoke  Urin }  and  M.elan- 
Crabs  for  this  purpofe  arc  fittefl :  The  fweet  ^bofty.  A- 
Apples  as  the  Pippin  and  Pearmain,  help  to  beat 
diliolve  Melancholly  ^humors,  and  to  procure  ^be  Li- 
Mirth,  and  therfore  are  fittefl  for  Confeftiio 
Alliermesy  and  Syrupus  de  Pomis.  The  Leavs  ^tomachi 
boyled  and  given  to  drink  in  hot  Agues,where 
the  heat  of  the  Liver  and  Stomach  caufeth  the 
Lips  to  break  out.and  theThroat  to  grow  dry, 
harlh  and  furred,  is  very  godd  to  walh  and 
gargle  it  withal,  and  to  drink  down  fom.  This 
may  to  good  purpofe  be  ufed  when  better 
things  ire  not  at  hand, or  cannot  be  had.  The 
Juyee  ®f  Crabs  either  Verjuyee  or  Cider,  is 
of  lingular  good  ufe  in  the,  Heat  and  faintings 
of  the  Stomach,  and  againll  Calling  to  make 
a  Pollet  with,  or  taken  fom  of  it  alone  by  it 
felf.  The  Juyee  of  Crabs,  or  Cider  applied 
with  wet  deaths  therein  to  fcalded  or  burnt  Scalding, 
places,  cooleth,healeth,  and  draweth  forth  the  Ewming, 
Fircf  A  rotten  Apple  applied  to  Eyes  blood-  Syes,  in- 
Ihotten,  or  enflamed  with  heat,  or  thsft  are  flamationy 
black  and  blue  about  them  byanyflroke  or  ulcers,  ^ 
fall,  and  bound  too  all  day  or  night,  hdpeth  Spots, 
them  quickly.  The  diflilled  Water  of  rotten  Freddies. 
Apples  doth  cool  the  heat  and  inflamations  of 
Sores,  and  is  good  to  bath  foul  creeping  Ul¬ 
cers,  and  to  walh  the  Face  to  take  ^way  Spots, 

Freckles  or  other  difcolorings.  The  diflilled 

Water  of  good  and  found  Apples  is  of  Ipecial 

good  ufe  to  procure  Mirth,  and  expel  McIan-< 

cholly.  The  Ointment  coWedPomatum,  if 

fweet  and  well  made,  helpeth  the  Chops  in  the 

Lips  or  Hands,  and  maketh  finooth  and  fup- 

pie  the  rough  Skin  of  the  Hands  or  Face  'par-  ^  Handsi 

ched  with  wind  or  other  accidents. 

Thus  my  Authors. 

All  that  I  can  fay  of  Apples  is  this  Z  . 

I  That  they  are  extream  windyi  "  > 

a  That  they  provoke  Urin,  being  foafted 
(efpecially  Pomwaters)  and  mixed  with  faic 
Water,  and  drunk  up  at  night  going  to  bed  ; 
half  a  doten  great  ones  mixed  with  a  quart  of 
•Water,  excellently  provokes  Urin,  if  there  be 
no  material  Hone  in  the  Body :  This  I  had  of 
Gerhard,  and  have  often  known  if  proved,and 
alwaies  with  good  fiiccefs.  All  Apples  loofeh 
the  Belly  and  plcafure,  the  Stomach  by  their 
coolncfs. 

.  1  ■  ■ 

Arrachwild  &'ftinking. 

.  .  DefcripfwL 

THis  hath  fmall  dnd  alinoftrourid  tciVfis, 
yet  a  little  pointed  and  without  dent- 'oic 
cut,  bf  a  dusky  mealyr  colour}  groVvi^Qn  the 
flender  Stalks  and  Branches  that  fpre.ad  on  the 
ground,  with  final  Flowers  iii  cluufers  jet  with 
I  the 


6 


the  Leaves,  and  fmal  Seeds  fucceding  like  the 
reft,  perifhmg  yearly,  and  rifing  again  with 
its  owii  foviring.  It  Imels  likd  old  rotten  Lifh, 
or  fotrithing  worfe. 

Tlace. 

It  grows  ufually  upon  Dtinghils. 

Time. 

They  flower  in  June  and  July 3  and  their 
Seed  is  ripe  quickly  after. 

Venues  and  ufe- 

Stinking  Anach  is  ufed  as  a  remedy  to  help 
Women  pained,  and  almoft  ftrangled  with  the 
iHothei")  ^otheti  by  fmelling  to  it :  But  inwardly  ta¬ 
ken,  there  is  not  a  better  Remedy  under  the 
CM&on  ioe  thatDifeafe.  I  would  be  large  in 
commendation  of  this  Herb,  were  I  but  Elo¬ 
quent.  It  is  an  Herb  imder  the  dominion  of 
Venus iZad  under  the  fign  Scorpio  :  It  is  com¬ 
mon  almoft  upon  every  Dunghil.  The  Works 
of  God  are  given  freely  to  Man,  his  Medicins 
are  common  and  cheap  ,and  eafie  to  be  found : 
*tis  the  Medicines  of  the  CoUedgofPhyfitians 
.  (  that  are  fo  dear  and  fcarcc  to  find)  I  com 
I  V  mend  it  for  an  Univerfal  Medicine  for  the 
Womb,  and  ifuch  a  Medicine  as  will  eafily,faf- 
f  ly,  and  fpeedily  cure  any  Difeaf  therof,  as  the 

.r'-’-'  fits  of  the  Mother,  Diilocation  or  falling  out 

tlierof ;  it  cools  the  Womb  being  over-hea- 
(And  let  me  tel  you  thisjand  I  wil  tel  you 
feut  the  truth.  Heat  of  the  womb  is  one  of  the 
sreateft:  cauKb  of  hard  labor  in  Childbirth)  It 
makes  barren  women  fruitful,  it  clenleth  the 
Womb  if  it  be  foul  and  ftrengthens  it  excee¬ 
dingly  5  it  provokes  the  Terms  if  they  be  ftop- 
.  •  ped,  and  ftops  them  if  they  flow  immoderatly.' 

You  can  defire  no  good  to  your  Womb,  but 
-  a  -  thisHerb  will  effeft  it  ;  therfore  if  you  love 
Children,  if  you  love  Healthjif  you  love  Eafe, 
keep  a  Syrup  alwaies  by  you  made  of  the  juyee 
of  this  Herb  and  Sugar  (  or  Honey  if  it  be  to 
clenf  the  Womb)  and.lctfuch  as  be  rich  keep 
it  for  thdr  poor  neighbors,  and  beftow  it  as 
freely  as  l  beftow  my  ftudies  upon  them,  or  elf 
let  them  look  to  anfwer  it  another  day  when 
the  LtMJd  ihall' come  ta  ntalie  inquijition  for 

u  ,f-.  r;  ••  • 

'  i  iif.U  J.  ill,  ■  :  ff"  . 

'  '  Archangel. 

^1^0  put  ti  glofs.  upon  their  priftice  5  the 
Phyfitians  call  an  Herb  (  which  Country 
pifoplq  jVjigaiily^  knew  |b|  ,'thc  naine  of  Dead- 
Niitles)  ^Skrehangeti  wnereih  whether  they 
h\or  oi  more  Superfiition  ot  Folly  I  leave  to 
the  judicious  Reader.  'There  is  more  curiofi- 
tythtin' couitefieto  my  Countrymen  uftSby 
^ersWthe«rpl3ination,afwel  of  the  Nadiies 
aS  DefciripdQn  of  this  fo  wd-known  an  Herbj 
which  that  I  ftiay  not  alfo'be  guilty  of.  Take 
this  Ihdrt'  De&riptton  firft  of  the  T^ed-Arch* 
aHrel, 

w 


Deferiptions. 

This  hath  diverf  fquare  ftalks  fomwhat  hai¬ 
ry,  at  the  joynts  whereof  grow  two  fad  green 
Leaves  dented  about  the  edges,  oppofit  to  one 
another,  the  lowermoft  upon  long  footftalks, 
but  without  any  toward  the  tops  which  are 
fomwhit  round,  yet  pointed,  and  a  little  crum¬ 
pled  and  hairy  ;  Round  about  the  upper  Joynts 
where  the  Leaves  grow  thick,  arc  fiindry  ga¬ 
ping  Blowers  of  a  pale  reddiih  colour,  after 
which  com  the  Seeds  three  or  four  in  a  Husk. 

The  Root  is  final  and  thriddy,  pcrifhing  every 
year  :  the  whol  Plant  hath  a  ftrong  feent,  but 
not  {linking. 

White-Archangel  hath  diverfe  fquare  ftalks 
not  {landing  {freight  upright  but  bending 
downward, wheron  {land  twoLeavs  at  a  Joynr, 
larger  and  more  pointed  than  the  other,dented 
about  the  edges  and  greener  alfo  more  like  un¬ 
to  Nettlc-Leavs,  but  not  {linking,  yet  hairy ; 

At  the  Joynts  with  the  Leavs  ftand  larger  and 
more  open  gaping  white  Blowers,  in  Husks 
round  about  the  Stalks  (but  not  with  filch  a 
bufli  of  Leavs,asBlowers  fet  in  the  top,as  is  on 
the  other)  wherin  ftand  final  roundifo  Hack 
Seeds :  The  Root  is  White, with  many  ftrings 
at  it,  not  growing  downward  but  lying  under 
the  upper  cruft  of  the  Earth,  and  abideth  many 
years  cncreafing :  This  hath  not  fo  ftrong  a 
feent  as  the  former. 

Fellow-Archangel  is  like  the  White  in  the 
Stalks  and  Leavs,  but  that  the  Stalks  are  more 
ftreight  and  upright,  and  the  Joynts  with 
Leaves  are  further  afunder,  having  longer 
Leavs  than  the  former ;  and  the  Blowers  a 
little  larger  and  more  gaping,  of  a  fair  yellow 
colour  in  moft,  in  fom  paler.  The  Roots  are 
like  the  White,  only  they  creep  not  fo  much 
under  the  ground. 

Flace. 

They  grow  almoft  every  where,  (unlefs  it  be 
in  the  middle  of  the  ftreet)  the  Yellow  moft 
ufually  in  the  wet  grounds  of  Woods,and  fom- 
times  in  the  dryer,  in  divers  Countries  of  this 
Nation. 

Time. 

They  flower  from  the  begining  of  the  fpring 
all  the  fummer  long. 

Venues  and  ufe. 

The  Archangels  are  fomwhat  hot  and  dryer 
than  the  fiinl(mg  "fettles,  and  ufed  with  better 
fuccefs  for  the  flopping  and  hardnefs  of  the 
Spleen  than  they  by  ufing  the  Decodion  of 
the  Herb  in  Wine,and  afterwards  applying  the 
Herb  hot  unto  the  Region  of  the  Spleen  as  a 
Plaifter,or  the  Deco Aion  with  Spunges.  The 
Blowers  of  the  fvhite  Archangel  axe  preferved,  white,Red 
or  conferved  to  be  ufed  to  ftay  the  Whites, and  andyellew 
the  Blowers  of  the  Red  to  ftay  the  Reds  in  Flux. 
Women.  It  makes  the  Heart  nyrry,  drives  a-  Melancho- 
way  Melancholly,quickcns  the  Spirits,  is  good  /y,  ^ar- 
againft  ^{artan  Agues,  ftancheth  bleedings  miAgues, 
at  Mouth  or  Nofe,if  it  be  ftsmped  and  applied  Bleeding 
'  to  atNofe, 


7 


The  EngUp^  Thyjitian. 


Swelling^  to  the  nape  of  the  Neck  :  The  Herb  alfo  bru- 
l^ings-E,-  fed  and  with  fomc  Salt  and  V inegar, and  Hogs 
viliGout}  Great  laid  upon  any  hard  tumor  or  iweiling  j 

Sciatica,  or  that  which  is  vulgarly  called  the  Kings  E- 
Joynts,  vil,  doth  help  to  diuolve  or  difeufs  thern,  and 
Ulcers,  old  being  in  like  manner  applied  doth  much  allay 
forces,  the  pains  and  give  eafto  the  Gout,  Sciatica, 

Briiifes,  and  other  aches  of  the  Joynts  and  binews  :  It 

Burnings,  is  alfo  veiy  eftedual  to  heal  all  green  Wounds, 
and  old  Ulcers,  alfo  to  ftay  their  fretting,  gna¬ 
wing,  and  fpreading  j  It  draweth  forth  Splin¬ 
ters  and  fuch  like  things  ptten  into  the  flefh, 
and  is  very  good  againft  bruifes  and  burnings* 
But  the  yellow  Archangel,  is  moft  commended 
for  old  filthy  corrupt  Sores  and  Ukers,  yea, 
although  they  grow  to  be  hollow  ^nd  to 
diflolve  tumors.  The  chief  ufe  of  them  is  for 
Women  it  being  an  Herb  of  Venus,  and  may 
be  found  in  my  Guide  ffff  Women. 

^  ^  ^  •3^  •I' ^  ^  “I?  *1?  •  ^  ^ ^ 

Arfmart. 

jyefeription  of  the  Mild. 

*^His  hath  broad  Leaves  fet  at  the  great 
X  red  Joynts  of  the  Stalks,  with  femicir- 
cular  blackifh  marb  on  them  ufually,  yet 
fomtimes  without :  The  Flowers  grow  m 
long  Spikes  ufually  either  blufh  or  whuilh 
with  fuch  like  Seed  following.  The  Root  is 
long  with  many  ftrings  thereat  periftiing  yeer- 
lyi  this  hath  ho  fhatp  taft  (as  another  fort 
hath,  which  is  quick  and  biting)  but  rather 
fowr  like  Sorrel,  or  elfalittle  drying  or  with¬ 


out  tail.  • 

Tlace. 

It  grows  in  watery  Plafhes,  Ditches,  and  the 
like,  which  for  the  moft  part  are  dry  in  Sum¬ 
mer* 

Time. 

It  Flowreth  in  June,  and  the  Seed  is  ripe  in 
Augufi. 

Vertues  and  ufe. 

It  is  of  a  cooling  and  drying  quality,  and 
very  effeftual  for  putrified  Ulcers  in  Man  or 
Beaft,  to  kill  the  Worms  and  clenfthe  putri- 
iilcers,  fied  Places  :  The  juyeetherof  dropped  in,  or 
Coldfwel-  jQthcrwife  applied,  confumeth  all  cold  Swel- 
lmgs,brm~  lings,  and diffolveth the, congealed  Blood  of 
fes, Conge-  binifes  by  ftrokes,  falls,  &c*  .A  piece. of  the 
led  Blood,  Of  fomc'  of  the  Seed  bruifed  and  held  to 

Toothach,  aching  Tooth,  taketh  away  the  pain*  The 
Felons,  or  Leaves  bruifed  and  laid  to  the  Joynt  that  hath 
Andicoms,  a  Fellon  theron,  taketh  it  away.  Thejuyee 
worms  in  deftroyeth  Worms  in  the  Ears  being  drdppcd 
the  Ears,  :  if  the  hot  Arfmart  be  ftrewed  in  a 

Fleas,Ti-  c^gn^ber  it  will  foon  kill  all  the  Fleas;  and 
redHorfes,  of  the  cold  Arfmart  put  to 

Horfes  or  other  Cartels  fores  will  drive  away 
the  Flie  in  the  hotteft  time  of  Summer :  A 
good  handful  of  the  hot  biting  Arfmart  put 


under  a  Horfes  Saddle  will  make  him  travel  Impoftums 
the  better  although  he  .were  half  tired  before:  Inflama- 
The  mild  Arfmart  is  good  againft  hot  Impo-  tions, 
fthumesand  Inflamations  at  the  begihning,  Wounds. 
and  to  heal  green  Wounds. 

All  Authors  chop  the  Vertues  of  both  forts 
of  Arfmart  together,  as  men  chop  Herbs  for 
the  Pot,  when  both  of  them  are  of  clean  con¬ 
trary  qualities.  The  hot  Arfmart  groweth  not 
fo  high  or  tall  as  the  mild  doth,  but  hath  ma¬ 
ny  leaves  of  the  colour  of  I^each  leaves,  very 
feldom  or  never  fpotted,  in  other  particulars 
it  is  like  the  former,  but  may  eafily  be  known 
from  it,  if  you  will  be  but  pleafed  to  break  a 
Leaf  of  it  crofs  your  T  ongue,  for  the  hot  will 
make  your  Tongue  to  fmart,  fo  will  not  the 
cold ;  if  you  fee  them  both  together,  you  may 
eafily  diftinguifti  them,  becauf  the  mild  hath 
far  broader  Leaves  :  And  our  Colledg  of  Phy-  . 

’  fitians  out  of  their  learned  care  for  the  pub- 
lick  good,  Mnglice  their  own  gain,miftake  the 
one  for  the  other  in  their  New-Ma(ler-Piecey 
wherby  they  difeover,  i.  Their  Ignorance, 
z*  Their  Careiefnefs,  and  he  that  hath  but 
half  an  eye  may  fee  their  pride  without  a  pair 
of  Speiftacies*  I  have  done  what  I  could  to  di- 
ftinguifti  them  in  their  Vertues,  and  when 
you  find  not  the  contraty  named,  ufe  the  cold. 

The  truth  is,  I  have  not  yet  fpoken  >Vith  Dr. 

nor  his  Brother  Dr.  Experience,  con¬ 
cerning  either  of  them  both. 

1  Afarabacca. 

Deferipuon. 

ASarrabacca  hath  many  Heads  rlfing  from 
the  Roots,  from  whence  come  many 
fmooth  Leaves,  every  one  upon  his  own 
Footftalk,  which  are  founder  and  bigger  than 
Violet  Leaves,  thicket  alfo,  and  of  a  darker 
greerf  ftiining  colour  on  the  upper  ftde,  and  of 
3  paler  yellow  green  underneath,  little  or  no¬ 
thing  dented  about  the  edges  j  from  among 
which  rife  final  round  hollow,  brown  green 
husks,  upon  ftiort  ftalks  about  an  inch  long, 
divided  at  the  brims  into  five  divifions,  very 
like  the  Cups  or  Heads  of  the  Henbane  Seed, 
but  that  they  are  fmallet ;  and  thefe  be  all  the 
Flowers  it  cartieth,  which  are  fomwhat  fweet, 
being  fmclled  unto,  and  wherein  when  they 
are  ripe  is  contained  final  cornered,  rough 
Seeds,  vefy  like  the  Kernels  or  Stones  of 
Grapes  or  Raifons*  The  Roots  are  finall  and 
whitifla  fpreading  diveff  waits  in  the  ground, 
and  encre'afing  into  diverf  Heads ;  but  not 
running  of  creeping  under  ground  as  fome  o- 
I  ther  creeping  Herbs  do  j  They  are  fomwhat 
fweet  :  n  fincil,  refembling  Nardus,  blit  more 
when  they  arc  dry,  than  green ;  and  of  a  uiarp 
but  not  unplcafant  taft* 

E  2 


Place 


8 


The  Englijh  ^hyfitian. 


Vlace. 

It  groweth  frequently  in  Gardens* 

Tme> 

They  keep  their  Leaves  green  all  Wintetj 
but  ftioot  forth  new  in  the  Spring,  and  with 
them  come  forth  thofe  Heads  or  Flowers 
which  give  ripe  Seed  about  Midfummer,  or 
fomwhat  after. 

Vertiies  and  life. 

This  Herb  being  drunk,  not  only  provokcth 
Vomimgy  vomiting,  but  purgeth  downward,  and  by  U- 
ChoWer,  j.]n  alfo,  purdng  both  Choller  and  Flegm  ;  if 

Tlegmi  yQy  3(1  iome  Spicknard,  with  the  Whey  of 

Goats  Milk  or  Honeyed  Water,  it  is  made 
Ooltrum-  more  ftrong,  but  it  purgeth  Flegm  more  ma-' 
ons  of  the  nifeftly  than  Choller,  and  thcrfore  doth  much 
Liver  and  jjgjp  pajjjs  in  the  Hips  and  other  parts,  it  be- 
^leen,  jj-jg  boyled  in  Whey,  it  wonderfully  helpeih 
Dropfyj  Obftrudion  of  the  Liver  and  Spleen,  and 
Jaundice 3  therfore  profitable  foi'thc  Dropfie  and  Jaun- 
^giies.  being  fteeped  in  Wine  and  drunk.  It 

helps  thofe  continual  Agues  that  come  by  the 
plenty  of  ftubborn  humors ;  An  Oyl  made 
therof  by  fetting  it  in  th?  Sun, with  feme  Lau¬ 
danum  added  to  it,  provoketh  fwcating  (the 
ridg  of  the  Back  being  anointed  therwith)  and 
^  therby  driveth  away  the  fhaking  Fits  of  A- 

gues.  It  will  not  abide  any  long  boyling,  for 
it  lofeth  its  chiefeft  .ftrength  therby  j  nor 
much  beating  j  for  the  finer  Pouder  doth 
provoke  Vomits  and  Urin,  and  the  courfer 
purgeth  downwards. 

The  common  life  herof  is  to  take  the  juyee 
of  five  or  feven  Leavs  in  a  little  Drink  to  canf 
Vomitings:  The  Roots  have  alfo  the  fame 
Vertue,  though  they  do  not  operate  fo  forci¬ 
bly,  yet  they  are  very  efTeftod  againft  the  bi- 
Serpents.  of  Serpents,  and  therfbre  is  put  as  an  in¬ 
gredient  both  into  Methridate  and  Venice 
Treacle.  The  Leaves  and  Roots  being  boy- 
led  in  Ly,  and  the  Head  often  wafhed  ther- 
withj  while  it  is  warm,  comfm-teth  the  Head 
and  Brain  that  is  ill  affefted  by  taking  cold, 
Memo'fy.  and  hclpeth  the  Memory. 

I  ftiall  defire  Ignorant  people  to  forbear  fhe 
ufc  of  the  Leavs,'  the  Roots  purge  more  gent¬ 
ly,  and  may  prove  beneficial  in  fuch  as  have 
Cancers,  or  old  putrified  Ulcers,  or  Fiftulacs 
upon  their  Bo  dies,  to  take  a  dram  of  them  in 
Pouder  in  a  quarter  of  a  pint  of  white  Wine 
in  the  morning.  The  truth  is,  I  fancy  Pur¬ 
ging  and  Vomiting  Medicines  as  little  as  any 
Man  breathing  doth,  for  they  weaken  Na¬ 
ture,  nor  fhall  never  advife  them  to  be  ufed 
unlefs  upon  urgent  neceflity.  If  a  Phyfitian 
be  Natures  (ervant,it  is  his  duty  to  ftrengthen 
his'Miftris  as  much  as  he  can,  and  weaken  her  .■ 
as  little  as  may  be.  ^  | 


Head. 


AfparaguSj  Sparagus^  or 
•Sperage. 

Vefeription. 

IT  rifeth  up  at  firll  with  diverfwhitifh  green 
fcaly  Heads,  very  brittle  or  eafie  to  break 
while  they  are  yong,  which  afterwards  rife  up 
into  very  long  and  flender  green  ftalks,  of  the 
bignefs  of  an  ordinary  riding  wand  at  the  bot¬ 
tom  of  moft,  or  bigger  or  IclTcr,  as  the  Roots 
are  of  growth;  on  which  are  fef  diverf  bran¬ 
ches  of  green  Leavs,  fliorter  and  fmaller  than 
Fennel  to  the  top,  atthejoynts  wherdf  come 
forth  fmall  moffie  yellowiih  Flowers,  which 
turn  into  round  Berries,  green  at  the  firft,  and 
of  an  excellent  red  colour  when  they  are  ripe, 
ihewing  like  Beads  of  Corral,  wherin  .are 
contained  exceeding  hard,  black  Seeds,  "rhe 
Roots  are  difperfed  from  a  fpongeous  Head 
into  many  long,  thick,  and  round  ftrings, 
wherby  it  fucketh  much  Nourilhment  out  of 
the  ground,  and  encreafeth  plentifully  there¬ 
by. 

Prickly  Afparagus^  Spara- 
guSj  or  Sperage. 


Vefeription. 

IT  groweth  ufually  in  Gardens  ;  and  fomc 
of  it  grows  wild,  in  /Appleton  Meadow  in 
where  the  poor  people  do  ga¬ 
ther  the  Buds,  or  y®ng  Shoots,  and  fell  them 
cheaper  than  our  Garden  Affaragns  is  fold  at 
London. 

Time.  . 

They  do  for  the  moft  part  Flower,  and  bear 
their  Berries  late  in  the  yeer,  or  not  at  all,  al¬ 
though  they  are  houfed  in  Winter. 

Venues  and  life. 

The  yong  Buds  or  branches  boyled  in  ones 
ordinary  broth,  maketh  the  Belly  foluble  and 
open,  and  boyled  in  white  Wine',  provoketh 
Urin  being  ftoppedj  and  is  good  againft  the 
Strangury,  or  difficulty  of  making  water  j  it 
expelleth  the  gravel  and  ftone  out  of  the  Kid¬ 
neys,  and  helpeth  pains  in  the  Reins :  And 
boyleft  in  white  Wine  or  Vinegcr  it  is  preva- 
lentfor  them  that  have  their  Arteries  loofned, 
or  are  troubled  with  the  Hip-Gout,  or  Sciati¬ 
ca.  The  Decodion  of  the  Roots  boyled  in 
Wine  ahd  taken  is  good  to  deer  the  fight,  and 
being  held  in  the  Mouth  eafeth  the  Toothach: 
And  being  taken  falling  feveral  mornings  to¬ 
gether  ftirreth  up  bodily  lull  in  Man  or  Wo¬ 
man 


"Belly 3 
^iranguru 
Difury, 
Gouty  Sci- 
aticUyEyes 
Tooth- ach» 


“l{eittSy 

Bladdery 

M other y 

Cram^y 

ChoUicl^y 

Convulfiort 


'Adders  '& 
V't^rs  .hi- 
mi,T>rop- 
fyy  Stone y 
Jaundiccy 
LeprofiCj 
ScabSy 
Scald 
Heads  y 
Stkchesy  ^ 
Stoncy  T>i- 
furyy  Xic- 
iiets. 


The  Englijhfhyfitidn.  ^ 


man  (whatfoevcr  Tome  have  written  to  the 
contrary.)  The  Gzedtn.  Afparagics  nouri- 
ftieth  moreThan  the  wild  ;  yet  hath  it  the 
fame  effefts  in  al  the  aforementioned  Diic^es. 
The  Decoftion  of  the  Roots  in  white  Wine, 
and  the  Back  and  Belly  bathed  therwith,  or 
kneeling  or  lying  down  in  the  lame,  or  fit¬ 
ting  thcrin  aS  a  Bath,  hath  been  found  cfFedtu— 
al  ac^ainft  pains  of  the  Reins  and  Bladder, pains 
©fAe  Mother  and  Chollick,  and  generally  a- 
gainft  all  pains  that  hawen  to  the  lower  parts 
of  the  Body  i  and  no  lefs  cffedtual  againft  ftifF 
and  benummed  Sinews,  or  thofe  that  are 
fhrunk  by  Cramps,  and  Convailfions,  and  hel- 
peththe  , 

Afh-Tree. 

THis  is  Towel  known  that  timc,wil  be  mif- 
Ipent  and  Paper  wafted  in  writing  a  De- 
feription  of  it  J  and  therfore  I  fhal  only  infift 
upon  the  Vertues  of  it. 

Vertues  and  Ufe- 

The  vong  tender  Topi  with  the  Leaves  ta¬ 
ken  inwardly,  and  Lome  of  them  outwardly, 
applied  are  fingular  good  againft  the  biting  of 
the  Viper,  Adder,  or  any  other  Venemous 
Beaft :  And  the  Water  diftilled  therfrom,  be- 
in<T  taken  a  final  quantity  every  morning  fa¬ 
lling,  is  a  fingular  Medicine  for  thofe  that  are 
fubjeft  to  i  Dropfie,  or  to  abate  the  gieatnefs 
of  thofe  who  are  too  grofs  pr  fat.  The  Deco- 
aionofthe  Leaves  in  white  Wine,  helpcth 
to  break  the  Stone  and  expel  it,  and  cureth  the 
Jaundice.'  The  Afhes  of  the  Bark  of  the  Afh 
made  intoLy,  and  thofe  Heads  bathed  ther¬ 
with  which  are  Leprous,  Scabby,  or  Seal  d, 

.  they  are  therby  cured.  The  Kernels  within 
the  Husks  commonly  called  Albeit  Keys,  pre- 
vaileth  againft  Stitches  and  pains  in  the  fidcs 
pioceeding  of  Wind,  andaVoideth  away  the 
ftone  by  provoking  Urin. 

I  can  juftly  except  againft  none  of  all  this 
faveonly  the  fir  ft,  'vi%.  That  Afli-tree  Tops 
and  Leaves  are  good  againft  the  biting  of  Ser¬ 
pents  and  Vipers,  and  1  fuppofe  this  had  its 
rife  from  Gerardy  or  'Plinyy  both  which  hold 
that  there  is  fuch  an  Antipathy  between  an 
Adder  and  an  Afh-tree,  that  if  an  Adder  be 
compafled  round  with  Afh-tree  Leaves,  fhe 
wil  fooner  run  through  the  fire  than  through 
the  Leaves,  the  contrary  to  which  is  the  truth, 
as  both  my  eyes  are  witnefles  t  the  reft  are 
Vertues  fomthi'ng  likely,  only  if  it  be  in  Win¬ 
ter  when  you  cannot  get  the  Leaves,  you  may 
fiifelyufetheBarkinftead  of  them,  the  Keys 
you  may  eafily  keep  all  the  year,  gathering 
them  when  they  are  ripe. 


Avens. 

Deferiptm- 

He  ordinary  Avens  hath  many  loflgj 
rough,  .dark green,  winged  Leavs  rifing 
from  the  Root,  every  one  made  of  manyLeavs 
fet  on  each  fide  of  the  middle  Rib,  the  largeft 
three  wherof  grow  at  the  ends  and  are  fnip’d 
or  dented  round  about  the  edges:  the  other 
being  fmal  pieces,fdmtimes  two  andfomtimes 
four  Handing  on  each  fide  of  the  middle  rib 
underneath  them  s  among  which  do  rife  up 
diverf  rough  or  hairy.  Stalks  about  two  foot 
high  branching  forth  with  Leavs  at  every 
Joynr,  not  fo  long  as  thofe  below,  butalmoft 
as  much  cut  in  on  the  edges,  fome  into  tfiree 
parts,  fomc  into  more  !  On  the  Tops  of  the 
Branches  ftand  fmal  pale  yellow  Flowers  confi- 
ftingof  fiveLeavs,Iike  theFlowers  ofCynkfpyl,' 
but  larger  in  the  middle,  wherof  ftandefh  a 
final  green  Head,  which  when  the  Flower  iS 
fallen  grpweth  to  be  rough  and  round,  being 
made  of  many  long  greenifh  purple  Seeds 
(like  grainO  which  wil  flick  upon  youc 
Cloathes.  The  Root  confifts  of  many  brow- 
nifh  firings  or  fibres,  fmelling  fomwhat  like 
unto  Cloves,  efpecially  thofe  -which  grow  in 
the  higher,  hotter,  and  drier  grounds,  and  in 
the  freer  and  clear  Air. 

Place. 

They  grow  wild  in  many  places  under  Hedg 
fidesj  and  by  the  Pathwaies  in  Fields, yet  they 
rather  delight  to  grow  in  fhadowy  than  in 
Sunny  places. 

Time. 

They  Flower  in  May  and  June  for  the  moft 
part,  and  their  feed  is  ripe  in  July  at  the  fur- 
theft. 

Vertues  and  ufe. 

It  ii  good  for  the  Difeafes  of  the  Cheft  or  Ereafiy 
Breaft,  for  pains  and  Stitches  in  the  Sides,  ^titcheSy 
and  to  expel  crude  and  raw  humors  from  the  windy  Bel- 
Belly  and  Stomach  by  the  fweet  favor  and  war-  lyyStomach 
ming  quality  j  it  diflblycth  the  inward  coix-  liiivard 
gealed  Blood  hapriing  by  falls  or  bruifes,  and  Wounds y 
the  fpitting  of  Bloody  if  the  Roots  either  Hea:rtyCol(l 
green  or  dryed  be  boyled  in  Wine  and  drunk,  BrainyOb- 
as  alfo  al  manner  of  inward  Wounds  or  ova- (If unions  y 
ward  if  they  be  wafhed  or  bathed  therwith.  ChoUic/iy 
The  Decoftion  alfo  being  drunk  comforteth  FluxeSy 
the  Heart,  arid  ftrerigthenethrthe  Stomachy  Ruptures  y 
and  a  cold  Brain,  arid  therfore  is  good  in  the  Spots  and 
Spring  time  to  open  Obftruftions  of  the  Li-  Mar^s  in 
ver,  and  helpeth  the  wind  Chollick  j  it  alfo  the  Facey 
hclpeth  thofe  that  have  Fluxes,  or  are  burfteri,  PlaguCy 
or  have  a  Rupture  j  Ittaketh  away  ipots  or  Poyfoyiy 
marks  in  the  Face,  being  wafhed  therwith ;  IndigefH* 
The  juyee  of  the  frefh  Root  dr  Pouder  of  the  on. 
dried  Root  hath  the  fame  with'  the  De- 

F  edition , 


lO 


Tl?e  EngUJj?  ‘  ^hyjitian. 


coftion.  The  Root  in  the  Spring  time  ftee- 

pedinWine  doth  give  it  a  delicat  favor  and 
taft  3  and  being  ditmk  falling  every  morning 
comforteth  the  Heart,  and  is  a  good  Preferva- 
tive  againil  the  Plague,~or  any  other  Poyfon  > 
it  helpeth  Digeftion,  and  warmeth  a  cold^o- 
roach,  an4  openeth  the  Obftrudions  or  the 
Liver  and;, Spleen.  * 

Jt  IS .  very  fafe,  you  need  have  no  Dole  pre- 
fefibed  j  and  is  very  fit  to  be  kept  in  every 

good  bodies  houfe. 

*  • 

Balm. 


1  HJs  Herb  is  fo  wel  known  to  be  an  Inha- 
jL  b)tant  almoft  in  every  Garden^that  I  flial 

nJneed  to  write  any  Defeription  thereof,  al¬ 
though  the  Vertues  thereof  which  are  many 
may  not  be  omitted. 

Vertues  andufe- 

•The  Arabian  Phyfitians  have  extolled  the 
Vertues  hereof  to  the  Skyes  >  although  the 

j  thought  it-not  worth  mentioning.  Se- 

,  It  caufeth  the  Mind  and  Hear.  ,0 

,  Worn  merry,  and  reviveth  the  Heart  fainting- 

SS-  in  their  fleep,  and  driveth  away  al  trou- 

Ln  ol  Melancholy,  or  black  Choller  ,- 

tukotL  vvhich  Avicen  alfo  confirmeth.  It  is  v^y  good 
^J  the  to  help  bigeftion,  and  open  Obfirudions  of 
the  Brain's  and  hath  fo  much  S^ahty 

HS^»'-  init(faith^t.irmj  as  to.  expel  thofe  Melan- 
mi  Ve-  cholly  vapors  from  the  Spirits  &  Blood  which 
Tmois-  are  in  the  Hcart  and  Arteries, although  it  can- 
Beafis  not  doOo  in  other  parts  of  the  Body.  _ 

SDo^'nic/faith,  That  the  Leaves  fteeped  in  Winp 
reZs  and  the  Wine  drunk,  and  the  Leays  externally 
mZkes  appH«d  is  ad-emedy  againft  the  ftmgof  Seqr- 
^'oothach  pions,  and  the  bitings  of  ipad  Dogs,  and  com- 

BtoX  ’  mend’eththcDecoaiontherof fotWomento 

■  Flux^  -  hath  or  fit  in  to  procure  their  Courfes  s  n  is 
Mulhroms  good  to  wafh  aching  Teeth  therwith,md  pro- 

hiaWe  for  thofe  that  have,  the  bloudy-Plux. 

.  b-Lthmg,  The  Leaves  alfo  with  a  little 
Gouty  Drink,  are  good  againft  a  Surfw  oi  MJ 
Livery  *  romesy  helps  the  griping  pains  of  the  Belly, and 
Spleen,.  being  made  into  anEleduary  is  good  ^or  them 
women  in  that  cannot  fetch  then-  breath :  ^ 

Child  bedy  it  takes  away  Wens, Kernels,or  hard  Swellings 

Faming  in  the  Plefh  or  Throat )  n  clenfeth  foul  Sores, 
in  travely  and  eafeth  pains  of  the  Gout :  It  is  good  fo 
Lis  the  Liver  and  Spleen.  A  Tanfie  or  Cawdle 

made  with  ^gs  and  the  juyee  therof  while  It  IS 

yong,  putting  to  itfome  Sugar  andRofewatei 
is  ciood  for  Women  in  Childbed  when  the  Af- 
tec°birth  is  not  throughly  avoided ,  and  for 
their  faimings  upon,  or  after  their  fore  trave  • 
The  Herb  bruifed  and  boyled  in  aiittle  Wme 
andOyl  and  laid  warm  on  a  Boil,  will  ripen 
and  break  it. 


It  is  an  Herb  of  jupiterr  and  under  Cancer, 
and  ftrengthens  Nature  much  in  al  its  aiftionsj 
let  a  Syrup  made  with  the  juyee  of  it  and  Su¬ 
gar,  (as  you  fliail  be  taught  at  the  latter  end  of 
the  Book)  be  kept  in  every  Gentlewomans 
houfe,  to  rcleevc  the  weak  ftorpachs  and  fick 
Bodiesof  theiypoor  lickly  Neighbors  >  as.alfo 
the  Herb  kept  dry  in  the  Houfthat  fo  with  6- 
ther  convenient  Simples  you  may  make  it  into 
an  Ekiluary  with  Hony  according  as  theDif- 
caf  is,  and  as  you  lhall  be  taught  at  the  latter 
end  of  the  Book. 


Barberry. 

THe  Shrub  is  fo  wel  known  to  every  Boy 
and  Girl  that  hath  but  attained  to  the  age 
of  feven  years,  that  it  needs  no  Defeription. 
Vertues  and  ufe^ 

3Iars  owns  the  Shrub,  and  prefents  it  to  the 
life  of  my  Country-men  to  purge  their  Bodies 
of  Chollcr.  The  inner  Rind  of  the  Barberry 
Tree  boyled  imWhitc-Wine  and  a  quarter  of  a 
pint  drank  each  morning, is  an  excellent  reme¬ 
dy  to  denfe  the  Body  of  Chollerick  Humors, 
and’free  it  from  foch  Difeafes  as  Choller  cau- 
feth,'fuch  be  Scabs,  Itch,TettersjRingworms, 
yellow* Jaundice,  Boils,  See.  It  is.exculent.for 
hot  Agues, Burnings,Scaldings,hcat  of  Bloud, 
heat  of  the  LiverjBloudy-flux,  for  the  Berries 
are  as  good  as  the  Bark ,  •  and  more  pleafing  i 
they  get  a  man  a  good  ftomach  to  his  vidf  uals, 
by  ftrengthning  the  attradive  faculty,  which 
is  under  Mars,  as  you  fee  more  at  large  in  the 
latter  end  of  my  E  phemeris  for  the  year  165 1. 
The  Hair  waflied  with  the  Ly  made  of  the  A- 
flies  of  the  T rce  and  Water,  ’twil  make  it  turn 
ye]!Loss,vi\-oi Mars  his  own  colour.The  Fruit 
and  Rind  of  the  Shrub,  the  Flowers  of  Broom 
and  of  Heath, or  FurZjclenf  the  Body  of  Chol¬ 
ler  by  as  the  Flowers,  Leaves  and 

*  Bark  of  the  Feach-Tree  do  hy  Antipathy  be- 
caufe  thefe  are  under  "that  under  Ve¬ 

nus. 


Cholkr, 

Scabsyltcb 

Tetters, 

ting'aaai'» 

TeUow- 

Jcumdkt, 

Beyls, 

\Agaes, 

BKmng, 

ScalAwgSy 

Apetit 

Hdi\ 


Barly. 

r  ♦■T^He  continual  lifefulnefs  hereof  hath  made 
1  1.  al  in  general  fo  aquainted  herewith,  that 

I  it  is  altogether  needlels  to  deferibe  its  feverai 
kinds  hereof  plentifully  growing,  being  year¬ 
ly  fown  in  this  Land.  The  Vertues  whereof 
take  as  followeth. 

j  Vertues  and  uj}. 

\  Barly  in  al  the  parts  and  compofitlons  ther- 
1  of  (except  ikffl/t)  is  more  cooling  than 
I  and  a  little  clenfing :  and  al  the  Preparations 

therof. 


The  EngUJh^hyJiticiH, 


1 1 


therof,  as  Barly-voater  and  othei; 
therofj  do  give  great  nounfhment^  .Jin  the 
troubled  with  leavers,  Agues,and  heats  m 
leavers.  Stomach.  A  Pultis  made  of 
Ag^esy  boyled  with  Vinegar  ^nd  j 

Stomach,  ^  few  dry  Figs  put  into  them,  diffolveth  an  | 
inp’Ijfthuml  and  afwaK*  1"®™“ 
ufimm-  tifeno  applied  ;  And  being  boyled  w 
ms^^ken  ^nd  Chamomel  Flowers,  and  wm 

reed.  Fenugreek  and  T{tie  in  Pouder,  and  ap- 
rhroat,  -Liied  warm,it  eafeth  the  pains  in  the  Sides  and 
Stomach,  andwindinefsofthe  peen. 
Kjngs-E-  Early sniFleawonhoykd  in  Wa^r, 

vil,Lep-fo-  and  made  into  a  Pultis  with  Honey  and  Oyl 

fie.  Flux,  of  Lillies,  applied  warm,  curethfwellmgs  un- 

Gom,  Itch  jbe  Ears, Throat,  Neck  and  fuch  lik  .and 

a  Plaifter  made  therof  with  T ar.  Wax  5c  Oyl, 
helpeth  the  Kings-Evil  in  the  Throat :  boy- 
led  with  fharp  Vinegar  into  a  Pultis  and  la  d 
on  hot  helpeth  the  Leprofie  :  Being 
ted  Wine  with  Pomgranat  Rinds  ^^d 
ftayeth  the  Task  or  other  Flux  of  the  Belly  . 
Boyled  with  Vinegar  andaQiimce,  it  eafeth 
the\ot  pains  of  the  Gout,  Barly  Hower,white 
Salt,  Honey  and  Vinegar  mingled  together, 
taketh  away  the  Itch  fpeedily  and  cenainly  . 
The  Water  diftilled  irom  the  green  Bailym 
the  end  of  May  is  very  good  for  thof  that  have 
Defluxions  of  humors  fallen  into  their  Eyes, 
and  eafeth  the  pains  being  dropped  into  them, 
or  White-Bread  fteeped  therein  and  bound  on 

to  tHe  Eyes,  doth  the  fame. 


ther  like  Lawyers :  Galen  and  Vlafcorides 
hold  it  not  fitting  to  be  taken  inwardly  ;  and 
Chryfippus  rails  at  it  with  downright  BiUingf- 
gatc-Rhetorick.  ■  Vliny,  and  the  Arabian  Phy- 
fitians  defend  it. 

For  mine  own  part  I  prefently  foimd  that 
fpeech  true  ‘, 

V  ‘^on  no  ftrim  inter  nos  tanus  componere 

lites.  L  '  ij  ' 

And  away  to  Dr  went  I,  who  told 
me  it  was  an  Herb  of  Mars,  and  under  the 
Scorpion,  and  perhaps  therfore  called  B  4/1- 
con,  and  then  no  racrvail  if  it  carry  a  kind  of 
virulent.quality  with  it :  Being  applied  to  the 
place  bitten  by  a  venemous  Beaft,  or  flung  by  a 
Wafp  or  Hornet,  it  fpeedily  draws  the  Poyfon 
to  it ;  Every  like  draws  his  like-  My\aldus 
affirms.  That  it  being  laid  to  rot  in  Horfdung 
it  wil  breed  Venemous  Beafls.And  Hoderim  a 
French  Phyfitlan  affirms  upon  his  own  know- 
ledg,  That  an  acquaintance  of  his  by  common 
fmelling  to  it,had  a  Scorpion  bred-  in  hisBrain. 
Somthing  is  the  matter  this  Herb  and  Rue  wil 
not*^row  together,  no,  nor  near  one  another : 
And^weknow  Rue  is  as  great  an  enemy  to  Poy¬ 
fon  as  any  grows. 

To  conclude  :  It  expclleth  both  Birth,  and 
After-birth  i  and  as  it  helps  the  deficiencyjof 
in  one  kind,  fo  it  fpoilsal  her  anions 
in  anothef .  1  dare  write  ho  more  of  it. 


Garden  Bazil, 


OR 


Sweet  Bazil- 


Defcriptidh,  ...  . 

•-r»He  greater  ordimiy  Ba^l  rifeth  up  ulu- 

;  I  ally  with  one  upright  Stalk  diyerfly  bran¬ 
ching  forth  on  all  fidcs,  with  two  Leaves  at  e- 
very  loynt ,  which  are  fomewhat  broad  ^d 
round,  yet  pointed,  of  a  pale  green  coloui,but 
fre^,  a  little  fnipt  about  the  edges,  and  of  a 
ftrong  heady  feent :  The  Flowers  are  fmal  and 
white  {landing  at  the  tops  of  the  Branches, 
with  two  fmai  Leavs  at  the  Joynt,  m  lorn  pla¬ 
ces  green,  in  others  brown,  after  which  come 
black  Seed.  The  Root  perifheth  at  the  ap¬ 
proach  of  Winter,  and-therfore  mutt  be  new 
fowen  every  year. 

Vlacc. 

It  only  groweth  in  Gardens. 

T  ime. 

It  mull  be  fowcdlate,  and  flowers  in  the 
heat  of  Summer,  being  a  very  tender  Plant. 

Vermes  and  Ufe. 

This  is  the  Herb  which  all  Authors  arc  to 
gether  by  jhe  Ears  about,  and  rail  it  one  ano- 


TheBay-Tred. 

'T’His  is  fo  wel  known  that  it  needs  no  De- 
**■  feription';  I  fhal  therfore  only  write  the 
Vertucs  therof,  which  arc  many. 

Vertucs  and  ufe- 

faith.  That  the  Leaves  or  Bark  do  ^ 
dry  and  heal  very  much,  and  the  Berries  more 
than  the  Leaves ;  The  Bark  of  the  Root  is  lefs 

fharp  and  hot,  but  rhore  bitter,  and  hath  fomc 

afliidion  withal,  whereby  it  is  effeaual  to  Stone,Ob- 
break  the  Stone,  and  good  to  open  obflrufti-  ftrucltons 
ons  of  the  Liver,  Spleen,  and  other  inward  oftheLi- 
parts,  which  bring  the  Drop^e,  Jaundice,8cc.  w  and 
The  Berries  are  very  effeftual  againft  al  Poy-  Spleen, 
fon  of  venemous  Creatures,  and  the  Stings  of  Dropfe, 
Wafps  and  Bees,  as  alfo  againft  the  Peftilence  Poyjon, 
or  other  infe^ious  Difeafes,  and,  therfore  is  Jaundice, 
put  into  fuudry  Triacles  for  that 
They  likewife  proarre  Womens  Courfes  J  and  wajps, 
feven  of  them  given  to  aWomartinforeflave 
of  Child-birth,  do  caufe  a  fpeedy  deliveiy,  and 
expel  the  After-birth  5  and 
taken  by  fuch  as  have  notgonout  i 
left'they  procure  Abortment,  or  cau  c  jftllwtU 

toofoon.  They  wonderfully  help  al  foUand.^^rtob 
rhumatickDlftiilations  from  rhr  B™n  to  the  gej, 
Eyes,  Lungs  or  other  parrs  ••  AndEemg  made  Umgs, 

il  an  Eleauary  whh  Honcyj^d^ap,^, 


12 


The  E?igUJ]?  Thyfltta?i. 


CoUghSj  Confumption ,  old  Coughs  j  flioi'tncrs  of 
Shortnefi  Breath,  and  thin  Rhcwins :  as  alfo  the  Mea- 
cf  Breathy  grim,  they  mightily  expel  wind  and  provoke 
Megrim,  Urinj  help  the  Mother,  and  kil  the  Worms: 
WindyVcY-  Xlic  Leaves  alfo  work  the  like  elFe£ts.  A 
tigOyDifu-  Bath  of  the  Decodion  of  the  Leavs  and  Eer- 
ryyMother,  ries,  is  fingular  good  for  Women  to  fit  in  that 
Worms,  are  troubled  with  the  Mother,  or  the  Difeafes 
Joynts,  therof,  orthe  ftoppings  of  their  Courfes,  or 
Nerves,  for  the  Difeafes  of  the  Bladder,  pains  in  the 
Arteries,  Bowels  by  wind^  and  ftoppnig  of  Urin :  A 
Stomach,  Decoftion  likewife  of  equal  parts  of  Bay-ber- 
Belly^  ries,  Cummin-Seed,  Hyfop,  Origanum,  and 
Womb,  Euphorbium,  with  fome  Honey ,and  the  Head 
'S-cers,  ^  bathed  therwith  doth  wonderfully  help  Diftil- 
Mar\sxn  lations  and  Rhewms,  and  fetleth  the  Fallat  of 
the  Mouth  into  its  place.TheOyl  made  of  the 
Berries  is  very  comfortable  in  ^1  cold  Griefs 
of  the  Joynts,  NervSjArtcrieSjStomach, Belly, 
or  Womb,  and  helpeth  Palfies,  Convulfions, 
Cramps,  Aches,  trembling  and  numnefs  in  a- 
nypart,  wearinefs  alfo,  and  pains  that  come 
by  fore  travelling  ;  Al  griefs  and  pain^  like- 
wife  proceeding  from  Wind,  either  in  the 
Head,  Stomach,  Back,  Belly,  or  Womb,  by 
anointing  the  parts  afFefted  therwith;  And 

j  Jains  in  the  Ears  are  alfo  cyred  by  dropping  in 
bmc  of  the  Oyl,  or  by  receiving  into  the 
Lars  the  warm  fume  of  the  Decoftion  of  the 
Berries  through  a  Funnel.  The  Oyl  takes  a- 
way  marks  of  the  Skin  and  Fleih  by  bruifes, 
fals,  &c.  and  diflolveth  the  congealed  Blood 
anthem:  It  helpeth  alfo  the  Itch,  Scabs,  and 
Wheals  in  the  Skin. 

I  flial  but  only  ad  a  word  or  two  to  what  my 
Friend  hath  written,  That  it  is  a  Tree 
.  r  Sun,  and  under  the  Coeleftial  Sign  Leo, 
Witchcraft  anj  refiftethWitchcraft  very  potently, as  alfo  al 
the  evil  old  Saturn  can  do  to  theBo’dy  of  Man, 
and  they  are  not  a  few,  for  it  is  the  Speech  of 
one,  and  I  am  miftaken  if  it  were  not  My\al- 
dus.  That  neither  Witch  nor  Devil,  Thun¬ 
der  nor  Lightning  wil  hurt  a  Man  in  the  place 
where  a  Bay-Tree  is. 


the  Sl(in, 

Itch, 

Scabs. 


% 


Beans. 


BOth  the  Garden  and  Field  Beans  are  fo 
wel  known  that  it  faveth  me  labor  of  wri¬ 
ting  any  ^Defeription  of  them:  Their  Ver- 
■  tues  briefly  are  as  followcth. 

■  The  dilifllcd  wather  of  the  Flowers  of  Gar¬ 
den  Beans  is  good  to  clenf  the  Face  and  Skin 
Spots,  from  Spots  and  Wrinckles,  and  the  Meal  or 
Stone,  Flower  of  them,  or  the  final,  doth  the  fame. 

Vifary,  The  Water  diftillcU  from  the  green  Husks  is 

Infiama-  i  held  to  be  very  effedual  againit  the  Stone,and 
tion,  to  provoke  Urine.  Bean  Flower  is  ufed  in 
Womens  g'  pultifles  to  affwage  Inflamations  rifing  upon 
Breafis,  Wounds,  and  the  dwelling  of  Womens  Breafts 


caufed  by  the  curding  of  their  Milk,  and  re- 
prefleth  their  Milk  :  The  Flower  of  Beans 
and  Fenugreek  mixed  with  Honeyjand  applied 
to  Fellons,  Boyls,  Bruifes,  or  blue  Marks  by 
blows,  or  the  Impofthumes  in  the  Kernels  of 
the  Ears,  helpeth  them  all ;  And  with  Rofe 
Leavs,  Frankinfenf  and  the  white  of  an  Egg 
being  applied  to  the  Eyes,  helpeth  them  that 
are  fwoln,  or  do  vvater ,  or  have  received  any 
blow  upon  them  if  ufed  with  Wine.  If  a  Bean 
be  parted  in  two,  the  skin  being  taken  away, 
and  laid  on  the  place  where  a  Leech  hath  been 
fet  that  bleedeth  too  much,  it  ftaieth  the  blee¬ 
ding.  Bean  Flower  boyled  to  a  Pultis  with 
Wine  and  Vinegar  and  fome  Oyl  put  therto, 
ceafeth  both  pain  and  fwclling  of  the  Cods  : 
The  Husks  boyled  in  Water  to  a  confumption 
ofa  third  part  therof  ftaieth  a  Lask  :  and  the 
Aflics  of  the  Husks  made  up  with  old  Hogs 
Greaf,  helpeth  the  old  pains,  contufions  and 
Wounds  of  the  Sinews ,  the  Sciatica,  and 
Gout.  The  Field  Beans  have  all  the  ^ore- 
mentioned  Vertues  as  the  Garden  Beans- 
Beans  eaten  areextream  windy  meat,  but  If 
after  the  Dutch  fafhion  when  they  are  half 
boyled  you  husk  them,  and  then  ftew  them  (I 
cannot  tell  you  how,,  for  I  never  was  Cook  in 
al  my  life)  they  are  wholfomer  Food. 


French-Beans^ 


T>efcrlption. 

'J’He  French  or  Kidney  Bean  arifeth  af 
firft  but  with  one  ftalk  which  afterwards 
dtvideth  its  felf  into  many  Arms  or  Branches^ 
but  alfo  weak  that  if  they  be  not  fuftained 
with  fticks  or  poles,  they  wil  lie  fruitlefs  upon 
the  ground  :  at  feveral  places  of  thefe  Branches 
grow  forth  long  footftalks,  with  every  one  of 
them  three  broad  round  and  pointed  ^een 
Leavs  at  the  end  of  them,  towards  the  tops 
wherof  come  forth  diverf  Flowers  made  like 
unto  Peafe-Bloflbms,  of  the  fame  colour  for 
the  moft  part  that  the  fruit  wil  be  of,  that  is 
to  fay,  white,  yellow,  ned,  blackiih,  or  of  a 
deep  purple  j  but  white  is  moft:  ufual  j  after 
which  come  long  and  flenderflat  Pods,  fome 
crooked,  fome  ftraight,  with  a  ftring  as  it 
were  running  down  the  Back  therof,  wherein 
arc  contained  flattifh  round  fruit  made  to  the 
fafliion  of  a  KidnSy ;  the  Root  is  long  and 
fpreadeth  with  many  firings  annexed  to  it,and 
perifheth  every  year. 

There  is  alfo  another  fort  of  French  Beans 
commonly  growing  with  us  in  this  Land, 
which  is  called  the  Scarlet  flowred  Bean. 

This  arifeth  up  with  fiindry  Branches  as  tire 
other,  but  runs  up  higher  to  the  length  of 
Hop-poles,  about  which  they  grow  twining, 
but  turning  contrary  to  the  Sun,  having  Foot¬ 
ftalks 


Felons,  tot 

Andicomsy 

BoUSyBjU' 

feSyEoi's. 

Eyes,  Lu- 

chest 


Cods  fvsf ti¬ 
led, Flux, 
Fain, 
Sinews, 
Sciatica, 
Gout.  . 


Vifitry, 
Shortnefi 
cf  breath, 
Jnoite  to 
Venery. 


A  gallant 
{heTV> 


Englijh  J^IyyJltian, 


I 


ftallcs  with  three  Leaves  on  each  as  on  the  o- 
ther :  The  Flowers  alfo  arc  in  faftiion  like  the 

other,  but  many  more  fet  together,  and  ot  a 

moft  Orient  Scalet  colour.  The  Beans  arc  lar¬ 
ger  than  the  ordinary  kind,  of  a  deep  Purple 
colour,  turning  black  when  it  is  ripe  and  dry. 
The  Root  perilheth  alfo  in  Winter. 

Vcnucu 

The  Qxiimvy  french  Beans  oxt  of  an  eahe 
digeftion,  they  move  the  Bclly,provoke  Urin, 
eidargctheBreali  that  is  ftraitned  withftiort- 
ne£s  of  Breath,  engender  S^erme,  and  incite 

Vener).  . 

^  And  the  Scarlet-coloiued  Beans  in  regm-d 
of  the  glorious  beauty  of  their  colour,being  fet 
near  a  Quickfet  Hedg,  wil  bravely  adorn  the 
fame,by  diming  up  theroii  j  fo  that  they  may 
be  difeerned  a  great  way,  not  without  admira¬ 
tion  of  the  beholder  at  a  diftance.  But  they 
wii  go  near  to  kil  the  Quickfets  by  cloathing 
them  in  Scarlet. 

Ladies-Bedftraw. 

•  Veftription. 

'T’His  arifeth  up  with  divers  fmal  broWn  and 
**■  fquare  upright  Stalks  a  yard  high  or  more, 

fomtimes  branched  forth  into  diverf  Mrts,  ful 

of  joynts,  and  with  diverfe  very  fine  (mall 
Leaves  at  every  one  of  them  little  or  nothing 
rough  at  al :  At  thp  tops  of  the  Branches  grow 
many  long  tufts  or  branches  of  yellow  Flowers 
very  thick  fet  together,  from  the  fever^  Joynts 
which  confift  of  four  fmal  Leavs  apiece, which 
fmcl  fomwhat  jlrong,but  not  unpleafant :  The 
Seed  is  fmal  and  black  like  Poppy  feed,t\yo  for 
the  moft  part  joyned  together  :  The  Root  is 
rcddifli  with  many  fmal  thrids  faftned  unto  it, 
which  take  ftjrong  hold  of  the  ground  and  cree- 
peth  a  little  :  And  the  Branches  leaning  a 
little  down  to  the  ground  take  Root  at  the 
Joynts  therof,  wherby  it  is  caftly  enereafed. 

Ther  is  alfo  another  fort  of  Ladies~Bed(t’raw 
growing  frequently  in  England,  which  beareth 
white  Flowers  as  the  other  doth  yellow  5  but 
the  Branches  of  this  are  fo  weak  that  unlefs  it 
be  fuftained  by  the  Hedges ,  or  other  things 
near  which  it  groweth  it  wil  lie  down  on  the 
ground  j  the  Leaves  a  little  bigger  than  the 
former,  and  the  Flowers  not  fo  plentiful  as 
thofc  5  and  the  Root  hereof  is  alfo  thridy,and 
abiding.  , 

flace^ 

They  grow  in  Meadows  and  Pafturcs  both 
wet  and  dry,  and  by  the  Hedges. 

Time. 

.  They  flower  in  May  for  the  moft  part,  and 
the  Seed  is  ripe  in  July  and  Augufi. 

Virtues  and  Ufe. 

The  Decoftion  of  the  former  of  thefe  being 


drunk  is  good  to  fret  and  break  the  Stone,  and 
provokes  Urin,  ftayeth  inward  bleedings,  and  ’ 
healcth  inward  Wounds  :  The  Herb  or  Flo- 
wer  bruifed  and  put  up  into  the  Noftrils,ftay- 
eth  their  bleeding  likewife  ;  The  Flowers  and 
the  Herb  made  into  an  Oyl  by  being  fet  in  the 
Snn,  and  changed  after  it  hath  ftood  ten  or 
twelve  dales  •,  or  mto  an  Ointment  being 
boyled  in  or  Sallct-Oyl  with  fome 

Wax  melted  therein  after  it  is  ftrained  j  cither 
the  Oyl  made  therof  or;  the  Ointment  do  help  •  -> 

Burnihgs  with  Fire,  of  Scalding  with  Water  ^ 
the  fame  sdfo,  or  the  Decodlion  of  the  Herb 
and  Flower  is  good  to  bath  the  Feet  of  Tra- 
vellers  and  Lacquies  whofe  long  running  cau-  If 

feth  wcarinefs  and  ftifnefs  in  their  Sinews  and  jg  ^ 
Joynts  j  If  the  Decoftion  be  ufed  warm,  and 
the  Joynts  afterwards  anointed  with  the  Oint-  ’ 
ment.  It  helpeth  the  dry  Scab, and  the  Itch  in 
Children  :  And  the  Herb  with  Ihe  white  Flo¬ 
wer  is  alfo  vely  good  for  the  Sinews,  Arteries, 
and  Joynts  to  comfort  and  ftrengthen  them  af¬ 
ter  travel.  Cold  and  pains. 

They  are  both  Herbs  of  Ke??j«,afvdtherforc 
ftrengthen  the  patrs  both  internal  and  exter¬ 
nal  which  fhe  rules. 

« 

.  •  •  i  ■  . 

Beets. 

»  , 

'Defciipiioii-  *  . 

THerc  arc  two  forts -of  Bcef-s  which  ate  beft 
■"*  known  generally,  and  wherof  I  ftial  princi¬ 
pally  intreat  at  this  time.  Vi\-  The  White  * 
andtheRcdBcctr,  and  their  Vermes. 

The  Common  white.  Beet  hath  many  great 
Leaves  next  she  ground  fomwhat  large,  and  of 
awhitifh  green  colour:  The  Stalk  is  great, 
ftrong  and  ribbcd,bcaring  great  ftorc  of  leaves 
uponitalmoft  to  thqyerytop  ofit:  The  flo¬ 
wers  grow  in  very  long  tufts,  fmal  at  the  ends, 
and  turning  down  their  Head.3,which  are  fmal, 
pale,  grcenifti,  yellow  Burrs,  giving  cornered 
prickled  Seed.  The  Root  is  great,  long  and 
hard, 'and  when  it  hath  given  Seed  of  no  ufe  at 
all.  '  ,  - 

The  Common  Bed  Beet  differeth  not  from 
the  White,  but  only  it  is  Iclfer  and  the  Leaves 
and  the  Roots  are  fomwhat  red  :  The  Leaves 
are  differently  red,in  fom  only  with  red  ftrakes 
or  veins,  fom  of  a  frefti  red,  and  others  of  a  • 
dark  red.  The  Root  hereof  is  red,  fpungy  and 
not  ufed  to  be  eaten.  Cltnf,  j)i- 

The  white  Beet  doth  much  loofen  the  Belly,  geftiDifury 
and  is  of  a  elenfing'and  digefting  qutdity,  and  ObflmSli-^ 
provoketh  Udn  The  juyee  of  it  openeth  ob-  ^ns  of  the 
ftvudlipns  both  of  the  Liver  and  S^een,  and  Liver  and 
is  good  for  the  Headaches  and  fwimmings  Spleen, 
therein,  and  turnings  of  the  Brain  3  and  is  ef-  V ertigo, 
fedlual  alfo  againft  al  venemous  creatures:  and  ^ enemom 
applied  upon  the  T cmplcs,  ftayeth  Inflamati-  Beafis» 

G  ons 


H 


The  Englijh  Thyjttim. 


Brningi  ons  in  the  Eyes  j  it  hclpeth  Burninp  being 
St.A?itho-  ufed  without  Oyl,  and  with  a  little  Allutn  put 
mcsFirey  to  it.  Is  good  for  St.  Anthonies  fire.  Itisal- 
jVheaiSy  fo  good  for  al  Wheals,  Pufhcs,  Blifters  and 
BhfterSy  Blains  in  the  Skin ;  The  Herb  boyled  and 
Chilblains,  laid  upon  Chilblains  or  Kibes,  helpeth  them ; 
Y^beSyltch  The  Decoftion  therof  in  Water  and  fome  Vi- 
Dandnff'y  negar  healeth  the  Itch,  if  bathed  thcrwith,  and 
Scurffy  clenfeth  the  Head  of  Dandraf,  ScurfF;  and  dry 
Scabs,  and  doth  much  good  for  fretting  and 
cersy  Can-  aatitning  Sores, Ulccrs,&  Cankers  in  the  Head, 
l^ersyBald-  Tegs,  or  other  parts,  and  is  much  commended 
nefi.  againftBaldneis  and  fhedding  ofHair. 

The  red  Beet  is  good  to  Bay  the  Bloody 
TlHxTems  Flux,  Womens>Courfcs,  and  the  Whites,  and 
fiopSy  to  help  the  yellow  Jayndice.  The  juyee  or 
ivhites,  the  Root  put  into  the  Noftrils  purgeth  the 
Stml(ing  Head,  heipeth  the  noif  in  the  Ears,  and  the 
Breathy  Tooth-ach;  the  j\jyce  fnuffed  up  the  Nofe 
Noije  in  helps  a  ftinkiiig  Breath  if  the  cauf  lies  in  the 
the  EarSy  Nofe  as  many  times  it  doth,  if  any  bruif  have 
Toothachy  been  there,  asalfowant  of  fmel  coming  that 
Smell  loft*  way. 

Water-Betony. 

Deferipiion- 

FIrft  of  the  water-Betony,  which  rifcik  up 
with  fquare  hard  greenilh  Stalks,and  fom- 
kimes  brown,  fet  with  broad  dark  green  Leavs 
dented  about  the  edges  with  notches,  fomwhat 
refcmbling  the  Leavs  of  the  Wood-Betony, 
•>  but  much  larger,  two  for  the  moft  part  fet  at  ;a 
Joynt.  The  Flowers  are  many,  fet  at  the  tops 
of  the  Stalks  and  Branches,  being  round  bel¬ 
lied,  and  open  at  the  Brims  and  divided  into 
two  parts,  the  uppermoft. being  like  a  Hood, 
and  the  loweft  like  a  Lip  hailing  down,  of  a 
dark  red  colour,  which  paffing  away,  there 
comes  in  their  places  fmsfl  round  Heads  with 
fmal  points  in  the  ends,  wherin  lie  final  and 
brownifh  Seeds  :  The  Root  is  a  thick  Bulb 
of  Brings  and  threds  growing  from  an  Head. 
Tlace. 

It  groweth  by  Ditchfides,  Brooks,  and  o- 
ther  Water-courfes  generally  through  this 
Land,  and  is  feldom  found  far  from  the.Wa- 
ters  Ifidcs. 

,  .  Time. 

It  Flowreth  about  July,  and  the  Seed  is  ripe 

in  Augufty 

Venues  and  ufe. 

It  Is  of  a  clenfing  quality  j  the  Leavs  brui- 
fed  and  applied  are  effe  dual  for  all  old  and  fil- 
Ulcers  Ulcers  ;  and  efpecially  if  the  Juyee  of  the 

Sruifesy  Leavs  be  boyled  with  a  little  Honey,  and  tents 
Sunbur-  dipped  therin,  and  the  Sores  drefl'ed  therwith : 

as  alfoior  Bruifes  or  Hurts  whether  inward  or 
outward.  The  diflilled  water  of  the  Leaves 
is  ufed  for  the  fame  purpofes }  as  alfo  ’to  bath 


-the  Face  or  Hands  fpotted  or  blemiflied,  or 
difcolored  by  Sunburning. 

I  confefs  I  do  not  much  fancy  diftlllcdWa- 
ters,  I  mean  fiich  Waters  as  arc  diBlllcd  cold, 
fomevertue  of  the  Herb  they  may  happliy 
have  (it  were  a  Brange  thing  clfe)  but  this  I 
am  confident  of,  that  being  diBilled  in  a  Pew-  ■ 
ter  Stil,  as  the  vulgar  and  apifh  falhion  isjboth 
Chymical  Oyl  and  Salt  is  left  behind,  unlcfs 
you  burn  them,  and  then  all  is  fpoiled.  Water 
and  al,  which  was  good  for  as  little  as  can  be 
by  fuch  a  DiBillation.  You  have  the  beB  way 
of  DiBillationin  myTr^zw/Z^ttiow  0/  the  Lon¬ 
don  Dijpenfatoiy.  The  CoUedg  of  Thyfitians 
having  as  much  skil  in  Diflillations  as  an  Afs 
hath  reading  Hebrew. 

Water-Bctony  is  an  Herb  oijupiter  in  Can¬ 
cer  owd  is  apropriated  more  to  Wounds  and 
Hurts  in  the  Breafl  than  Wood-Betony  which 
follows. 

Wood=Betony. 

\ 

Defeription. 

THe  Common  or  Wood-Betony  hath  m,any 
Leavs  rifing  from  the  Root  which  are 
fomwhat  broad  and  round  at  the  ends,  roundly 
dented  about  the  edges.  Banding  upon  long 
FootflaJks,  from  among  which  rife  up  final, 
fquare.  Bender,  but  yet  upright  hairy  Stalks, 
with  fome  Leaves  thereon,  two  apiece  at  the 
Joynts,fmallerthan  the  lower,  whereon  are 
let  feveral  fpiked  Heads  of  Flowers  like 
Lavendcr,but  thicker  and  fhorter  for  the  moB 
part,  and  of  a  reddilh  or  purple  colour,  fpotted 
with  white  fpots  both  in  the  upper  and  lower 
part :  The  Seeds  being  contained  within  the 
Husks  that  hold  the  Flowers,  are  blackilh, 
fomwhat  long  and  uneven.  The  Roots  are 
many  white  threddy  firings  j  the  Stalk  peri- 
fheth,  but  the  Root  with  fome  Leavs  theron, 
abides  al  the  Winter.  The  Vhol  Plant  is 
fomwhat  final. 

Tlace. 

It  groweth  frequently  in  Woods,  and  de- 
lighteth  in  Shady-places. 

Time. 

And  it  flowreth  in  July,  after  which,  the 
Seed  is  quickly  ripe,  .yet  in  its  prime  in 
May. 

Vertues  and  vfe. 

•Antonius  CMnfa  Phyfitlan  to  the  Emperor 
/lugullus  Ceefar,  wrote  a  peculiar  Book  of  the 
Vertues  of  this  Herb,  and  amongfl  other 
Vertues,  faith  of  it.  That  it  preferveth  the 
Lives  and  Bodies  of  Men  free  from  the  danger  Epidemi- 
of  Epidemical  Difeafes,  and  from  Witchcrafts  cal  Vifea- 
alfo  :  It  is  found  by  daily  experience  to  be  fes,  witek- 
good  for  many  Difeafes  5  It  helpeth  thofe  that  craft,Ape- 
foath,  or  cannot  digefi  their  Meat,  thofe  that  the,  indi- 

honegeftion. 


TbeEnglip ^hyjitian. v 


15 


Stomach,  have  weak  Stomachs,  or  fower  belchings,  01 

Belchin?,  continual  ri(ing  in  their  Stomach, 

Jaundice,  miliarly  cither  green  or  dry  j  either  the  Herb, 
Falling-  the  Root,  or  the  blowers  in  Broth  drunk,  or 
fickne^.  Meat,  or  made  into  Conferve,  Syrup,  Water 
Palfey,  Eleduary,  or  Pouder  as  every  one  may  beit 
Convulfion  frame  themfelvs  unto,  or  as  the  time  or  leaion 
\hrinliing  requireth,  taken  any  of  theaforefaid  waies.  It 
of  the  Si-helpeth  the  Jaundice,  PaUing-ficknefs ,  the 
71CTVS,  Palfie,  Gonvulfions  or  fhrinking  01  the  01- 
G  out,  news,  the  Gout,  and  thofe  that  are  inclined  to 
Dropfie,  Dropfies,  thofe  that  have  continual  Pamf  m 
Trenfie,  their  Head,although  it  turn  t9  Phrenfie.  The 
Cough,  Pouder  mixed  with  pure  Honey  is  no  kls-a- 
CoU,  vailable  for  al  foits  of  Coughs 
fbortnef  WhecGng  or  fhortnefs  of  Breath,  Diltillati- 
of  Breath,  ons  of  thin  Rhewm  upon  the  Lungues,  which 
Agues  of  caufeth  Confumptions.  The  Decoft ion  made 
all  forts,  with  Mead  and  a  little  Penyroyal,  is  good  J^or 
Sore  Eyes,  thofe  that  aretroubled  with  putridAgues,whe- 
Worms,  ther  Quotidian,  T ertian,  or  Quartan,  and  to 

Obftruki-  draw  down  and  evacuate  theBlood  and  humors 
ons  of  fhfthatby  falling  into  the  Eyes  do  hinder  the 
Liver  Sight:  The  Decoaiontherof  made  m Wine 

Spleen,  and  taken,  killeth  the  Worms  in  the  Belly,  o- 
Stitches,  peneth  Obftruftionsboth  ofthe  Spleen  and 
Tains  in  Liver,  cureth  Stitches  and  Pains  in  the  Back, 
the  Back  or  Sides,  the  Torments  and  griping  pains  of 
aud  Belly,  the  Bowels ,  and  the  wind  Chollick :  and 
Terms  mixed  with  Honey  purgeth  the  Belly,  hclpeth 
provokes,  to  bring  down  Womens  Courfes,  and  is  of 
Mother,  efpecial  ufe  for  thofe  that  are  troubled  with  the 
Childbirth  fadUng  down  of  the  Mother,  and  pains  thcrot. 
Stone,  and  caufeth  an  eafie  and  fpeedy  delivery  of 
Toothach,  Women  in  Childbirth :  it  helpeth  alio  to 
Venernom  break  and  expel  the  Stone  either  in  the  Bl^d- 
Beafis,  der  or  Kidneys*  The  Decoftion  wth  Wine 
Mod-dogs  gareledinthe  Mouth,  eafeth  the  Toothach. 
Wearinef,  it  is  commended  againft  the  fting  or  biting 
Bleeding  or  Venemous  Serpents  or  Mad  Dogs.  Being 
at  Mouth  i)fcd  inwardly  and  applied  outwardly  to  the 
and  Nofe,  place.  A  dram  of  the  Ponder  in  Betony  '^®hcn 
Tiffing  &  with  a  little  Honey  in  fome  Vinegar,  doth 
(pitting  of  wonderfully  refrelh  thofe  that  are  overwearied 
Blood,  by  travail  j  it  ftaieth  bleedings  at  the  Mouth 
T^uptures,  or  Nofe,  and  helpeth  thofe  that  pifs  or  fpit 
Bruifes,  Blood,  and  thofe  that  are  Burften  or  have  a 
Wounds,  Rupture,  and  is  good  for  fuch  as  are  bruifed 
Veins  and  by  any  fall  or  otherwife.  The  green  Herb 
Sinews  bruifed,  or  thejuyee  applied,  to  any  inward 
hurt  or  outward  green  W ound  in  the  Head  or 
Ulcers,  Body  wil  quickly  heal  and  clofe  it  ups  as  alfo 
Fiftulaes,  any  Veins  or  Sinews  that  are  cut  5  and  will 
draw  forth  any  broken  Bone,  or  Splinter, 
Thorn  or  ocher  thing  gotten  into  the  Plelh  : 

It  is  no  lefs  profitable  for  old  Sores,  or  filthy 
Ulcers,  yea,  though  they  be  Eiftulaus  and 
hollow,  butfome  do  advife  to  put  in  a  little 
Salt  to  this  purpofe :  Being  applied  with  a 
little  Hogs  Lard,  it  helpeth  a  Plague-Sore, 
and  other  Boyls  and  Pulhes  c  The  tumts  of  [ 
the  Decodion  while  it  is  warm  received  by  a  j 
Funnel  into  the  Ears, eafeth  the  pains  of  t^hem,  \ 


deftroyeth  the  Worms,  and  cureth  the  running 
Sores  in  them.  The  juyee  dropped  into  them 
doth  the  fame.  The  Root  of  Betony  is  difi* 
pleafing  both  to  the  tail  and  Stomach,  whereas 
the  Leavs  and  Flowers  by  their  fweet  and  fpi(7 
taft,  are  comfortable  both  in  Meat  and  Mcdi- 


Ears. 


cine.  ' 

There  are  foti*  of  the  many  Vertues  Anto¬ 
ny  M  uf  am  expert  VhyC\nin  (for  it  was  not 
thipraiSticeoi  OSiavm  Cafar  to  keep  Pools 
about  him)  apropriates  to  Betony  i  It  is  a 
very  precious  Herb  that  s  certain,  and  moil 
fitting  to  be  kept  in  a  mans  houf  both  in  Sy¬ 
rup,  Conferve,  Oyl,  Oyncment,  and  Plaiftcr. 

The  Flowers  are  ufually  Conferved. 

The  Herb  is  apropviated  to  the  Planet  JUr 
piier,  and  the  Sign  Aries, 

» 

TheBeechflXree. 

IN  treating  of  thisTree,you  mull  underftand 
that  I  mean  the  great  Ma[l  Beech  j  which 
is  by  way  of  diftindion  from  that  other  final 
rough  fort,  called  in  the  final  Beech  5 

but  in  Ejfea:,  Hornbeam.  ,  , 

I  fuppofe  it  needlefs  to  defcribe  it,  being  al¬ 
ready  fo  wel  known  to  my  Countrymen. 

Tlace. 

It  growdh  in  Woods  amongft  Oaks,  and  0- 
ther  Trees,  andin  Parks,  Forrefts,  and  Cha¬ 
fes,  to  feed  Deer  5  and  in  other  places  to  fat¬ 
ten  Swine. 

Time. 

It  bloomcth  in  the  end  of  Ar’d^ov  begining 
o(May  for  the  moft  part,  and  the  Fruit  is  ripe 

in  September,  ^ 

Vertues  and,  ufe. . 

The  Leavs  of  the  Beech-Tree  arc  cooling  Cools f 
and  binding,  and  therfore  good  to  be  applied  Binds, 
to  hot  Swefiings  to  difeufs  them :  The  Nuts  Hot  fwel- 
do  much  nourilh  fuch  Beaft?  as  feed  thereon :  lings. 

The  Water  that  is  found  In  the  hollow  places  Scurf, 
of  decaying  Beeches,  will  cure  both  Man  and  Scabs, 
Beaft  of  any  Scurf,  Scab,  or  running  Tetters,  Tetters^ 
iftheybewalhedtherwith.  Youmay  boylthe  . 
Leavs.  into  a  Pultis,  or  make  an  Ointment  of 
them  when  time  of  year  ferves.  ^ 

BiliBerriE'S* 

Called  alfo  {by  fom'^ 

Whorts,  andWhottkhcrrks. 

T>efcriptions, 

OF  thefc  I  lhal  only  fpcakof  two  forts, 
which  are  commonly  known  in  Snglt^y 
Vi%:  The  Blacki  and  the  Ked  BUb&rrkS’  And 
fir  ft  of  the  Black.  . 


The  EngUJh  ^hyjitian. 


This  ikial  Biifh  creepeth  along  upon  the 
gronnei,  fcarce  rifing  half  a  yard  high,  with  di'- 
verffttial  darkgreen  Leaves  fet  on  the  green 
Branchesjhot  dwiies  one  againft  another,  and 
a  little  derited  about  the  edges :  At  the  foot  of 
the  Leaves  com  forth  fmal,  hollow,  palc,blufh 
coloured  Flowers,  the  brims  ending  in  five 
points,  with  a  reddifh  thread  in  the  middle, 
which  pafs  into  fmal  round  Berries  of  the  big- 
hefs  aim  colour  of  Juniper  BerrieSi  but  of  a 
Furple  fwcetifh  (harp  taft  J  the  JuyCc  of  them 
giveth  a  Purplifli  colour  to  their  Hands  and 
Lips  that  eat  and  handle  them,  elpecially  if 
they  break  them.  The  Root  groweth  afloop 
under  ^piind,  (hooting  forth  in  fundry  places 
as  it  creepeth  ;  This  lol«h  its  Leaves  in  Win¬ 
ter. 

'i^he  Red  Bilberry ^  or  JVhortle-bufh,  rifeth  up 
like  the  former,  having  fundry  harder  Leaves, 
like  the  Box-Tree  Leaves,  green  and  round 
pointed  (landing  on  the  feveral  Branches,  at 
the  tops  whereof  only,  and  not  from  the  fides 
*  as  in  the  former,  com  forth  diverf  round 

flowers  of  ap3lered'color,after  which  fucceed, 
round,  reddilh  fappy  Berries  when  they  are 
ripe,  of  a  (harp  taft  :  The  Root  runneth  in  the 
*  ground,as  the  former  i  but  the  Leaves  of  this 
abide  al, Winter. 

Place. 

T he  firft  groweth  in  Forrefts,on  the  Heaths 
and  fuch  like  barren  plaaces :  The  Red  grows 
in  the  North  parts  of  this  Land,  as  Lanca- 
(hirCi  Tor^fhirej  See. 

Time. 

They  (lower  in  March  and  Mpril  5  and  the 
Fruit  of  the  Black  is  ripe  in  June  and  July. 

Vertue  and  Ufe. 

The  Blacli  Bilberries  are  good  in  hot  Agues 
AgueSj  and  to  cool  thciheat  of  the  Liver  and  ftomachj 

Stpmacby  they  do  fomwhat  bind  the  Belly,  and  (lay  V 0- 
Liver^  mitings  and  Loathings:  The  juyee  of  the 
y omiungi  Berries  made  into  a  Syrup,  or  the  Pulp  made 
Apetit  lo(i)  into  a  Confenx  with  Sugar,  i5  good  for  the 
Cougby  '  purpofes  aforefaid,  as  alfo  for  an  old  Cough  or 
Phafic^y  Ulcer  in  the  Lungs,or  other  difeafes  there- 
Pluxts.  jjj,  are  more  binding,  and 

flop  Womens  Courfes,  fpittihg  of  Blood,  or 
•  any  other  Flux  of  Blood  or  Humors,  being 
ufed  afwel  outwardly  as  inwardly. 


Leaves  (but  whiter)  (et  at  the  middle  of  the 
Stalk  one  againft  another,  and  compafteth  it 
round  at  the  bottom  of  them. 

Place. 

It  is  a  ufual  Inhabitant  in  ^'oods yC opf cs ,0Lnd 
in  many  other  places  in  this  Land. 

There  is  another  fort  growes  in  wet  grounds 
and  Marlhcs,  which  is  fomwhat  differing  from 
the  former :  It  is  a  fmaler  Plant,  and  greener, 
having  fomtimes  three  Leaves ;  the  Spike  of 
former,  and  the  Roots 
of  this  do  run  or  creep  in  the  ground. 

They  arc  much  and  often  ufed  by  many  to 
good  purpofe  for  Wounds  both  green  and  old, 
and  to  confolidate  or  knit  Ruptures. 

The  Birch-Tree. 


T  vejcnption. 

His  groweth  a  goodly  tall  ftraight  Tree, 
ff  aught  with  many  Boughes  and  (lender 
Branches  bending  downward  s  the  old  ones 
being  covered  with  a  difcoloured  chapped 
Bark,  and  the  yonger  bein^  browner  by  much: 
The  Leaves  at  their  firft  breaking  out  are 
cruntpledjand  afterward  like  the  BecchLeaves, 
but  fmaler  and  greener,  and  dented  about  the 
edges  :  It  beareth  fmal  (hort  Catkins,fomwhat 
like  thofe  of  the  Haxel-Nut-tree,  which  abide 
on  the  Branches  a  long  time,  until  growing 
ripe  they  fall  on  the  ground,  and  their  Seed 
with  them. 


Place. 

It  ufually  groweth  in  Woods. 

Venues. 

The  Juyee  of  the  Leaves  while  they  are 
yong,  or  the  diftilled  Water  of  them,  or  the 
Water  that  corns  out  of  theTrec,  being  bored 
with  an  Augur  and  diftilled  afterwards  5  any 
of  thefe  being  drunk  for  fom  time  together,  is 
available  to  break  the  Stone  in  the  Kidnies  or 
Bladder  5  and  is  good  alfo  to  wa(h  fore 
Mouths. 


Stoacy  fore 
Months. 


BirdsToot. 


Bifoylj  or  Twayblade. 

.  ,  ,  Defeription. 

''His  fmal  Herb  from  a  Root  fomewhat 
fweet ,'  (hooting  downwards  many  long 
ftrings,  rifeth  up  .a  round  green  Stalk  bare  or 
naked  next  the  ' ground  ^r  an  inch,  two  or 
tbite  to  the  middle  therof,  as  it  is  in  age  or 
growth,  as  alfo  from  the  middle  upward  to  the 
Flowers,  having  only  two  broad  Planianrlike 


THis  fmal  Herb  groweth  not  above  a  fpan 
high,  with  many  Branches  fpread  on  the 
ground,  fet  with  many  wings  of  fmall 
Leaves  5  The  Flowers  grow  upon  the  Bran¬ 
ches,  many  fmal  ones  of  a  pale  yellow  colour, 
being  fet  at  a  head  together,  which  afterwards 
turn  into  fo  many  irnal  joynted  Cods  with 
Seeds  in  them  5  the  Cods  well  refembliug  the 
Claws  of  fmtd  Birds ,  wihence  it  took  its 
name. 

There  is  ai^ther  fort  ©f  Birds-Veot  in  all 

things 


t 


1/ 


T>ryi  Blnd> 
Wounds, 
Stone, 
Ruptures. 


Vifury, 

Term^  pro- 

voltes, 

wind, 

ChoUiclt, 

Venemous 

Beafts, 

Canthaa- 

ridesjblaclt 

and  blew 

Spots, 


The  EngUp  fhyfitian. 


things  like  the  former,  but  a  little  larger ;  the 
Flowers  of  a  pale  Whitifti  red  colour,  and  the 
Cods  diftina  by  Joynts  like  the  other,  but  a 
little  more  crooked,  and  the  Roots  do  carry 
many  Imal  white  Knots  or  Kernels  amonglt 
the  Strings, 

Place. 

Thefe  grow  on  Heaths,  and  many  open  un¬ 
tilled  places  of  this  Land. 

Time. 

They  flower  and  feed  in  the  end  of  Sum¬ 
mer. 

Venues  and  «/e. 

They  are  of  a  drying,  binding  quality,  and 
therby  very  §ood  to  be  uCcd  in  Wound-drinksj 
as  alfo  t®  apply  outwardly  for  the  fame  pur- 
£ofe.  But  the  latter  Birds-foot  is  found  by  ex¬ 
perience  to  break  the  Stones  in  the  Back  or 
KidnieSjand  drive  them  forth,  if  the  Decodi- 
on  therof  be  taken  •,  and  it  wonderfully  hel- 
peth  the  Rupture,  being  taken  inwardly,  and 
outwardly  applied  to  the  place. 

All  Salts  have  beft  operation  upon  the  Ston, 
as  Ointmems  &  Plaifters  have  upon  Wo^ds; 
and  therfore  if  you  may  make  a  Salt  of  this  for 
the  Stone,  the  way  how  to  do  fo  may  be  found 
in  myTranflation  of  the  London  Diifenfatory, 
and  it  may  be  I  may  give  you  again  in  plainer 
terms  at  the  latter  end  of  this  Book. 

Bifliops=weed. 

DeferiptioH. 

Common  Bijhops-weed  rifeth  up  with  a 
round  ftraight  Stalk,  fomtimes  as  high  as 
a  Man,  but  ufually  three  or  four  foot  high,be- 
fet  withdiverffmal,  long,  and  fomwhat  broad 
Leavs,  cut  in  fom  places  and  dented  about  the 
edges, growing  one  againft  another,  of  a  dark 
green  colour  •,  having  fundry  Branches  on 
them,  and  at  the  top  final  umbels  of  white  fio- 
werSjVdiich  turn  into  final  i;ound  brown  Seed, 
little  bigger  th?n  Parfly-feed,  of  a  quick  hot 
feent  and  taft  :  The  Root  is  white  and  ftrin- 
gie,  periftiing  yearly  after  it  hath  feeded,  and 
ufually  rifeth  again  of  its  own  fowing. 

Place. 

It  groweth  wild  in  many  places  in  England 
and  Wales,  as  between  Greenheath  and  Gravf- 
end. 

Venues. 

It  digefteth  Humors,  provoketh  Urin  and 
Womens  Courfes,  diifolvethWind  i  and  be¬ 
ing  taken  in  Wine,  eafeth  pains  and  griping 
in  the  Bowels,  and  is  good  againft  the  biting 
of  Serpents :  It  is  ufed  to  good  effeft  in  thofe 
Medicins  which  are  given  to  hinder  the  poy- 
fonful  operation  of  Cantharides  upon  the  paf- 
fages  of  the  Urin :  Being  mixed  with  Honey, 
and  applied  to  black  and  blue  marks, coming  of 
blows  or  bruifes,  it  takes  them  away :  and  be¬ 


ing  drunk  or  outwardly  applied,  it  abatethan  HtiU' 
high  colour,and  makes  it  pale  ;  and  the  Pumes  , 

therof  taken  with  Roxin,orRaifons,  clenfeth  i-Lp./ 
the, Mother. 

It  is  hot  and  dry  in  the  third  degree,  of  a 
bitter  taft  and  fomthing  ftiarp  withft  j  it  pro¬ 
vokes  Luft  to  purpofe I  fuppofe  Venus  owns 


It. 


Biftort  ,or  Snakeweed. 

Vefbription. 

THis  hath  a  thick,  fhort,  knobbed  Root, 
blackifti  without,  and  fomwhat  reddilh 
within,  a  1  ittle  crooked  or  turned  together,  of 
an  harfti  aftringent  taft,  with  diverf  black 
threds  hanging  there,  from  whence  fpring  up 
every  year  diverf  Leaves  ftanding  upon  long 
Footftalks,  being  fomwhat  broad  and  long 
like  a  Dock-leaf,  and  a  little  pointed  at  the 
ends,  but  that  it  is  of  a  blewifti  green  colour 
on  the  upper  fide,  and  of  an  Alh  colour  gray, 
and  a  little  purplifti  underneath,  with  diverf 
Veins  therin  j  from  among  which  rife  up  di¬ 
verf  final  and  (lender  Stalks,  two  foot  high, 
and  almoft  naked,  and  without  Leavs,  or  with 
very  few,  and  narrow,  bcariiig  a  fpiky  Bufti  of 
pale  Flefti  colour’d  Flowers,  which  being  paft 
there  abideth  final  Seed,  fomwhat  like  unto 
Sorrel  Seed,  but  greater. 

There  are  other  fort^of Biftort,  gvovfing  in 
this  Land,  but  fmaller,  both  in';  height.  Root,  .  . 
and  Stalks,  and  efpecially  in  the  Leavs,  The 
Root  blackifti  without,  and  fomwhat  whitifti 
within,  of  an  auftere  binding  taft  a-s  the  for¬ 
mer. 

Place. 

They  grow  in  ftiadowy  moift  Woods,  and 
at  the  foot  ofHils,  but  are  chiefly  nouriftied 
up  in  Gardens.  The  narrow  leaved  Biftort 
groweth  in  the  North,  in  Lancajhire,  'Terl{~ 

Jhire,  and  Cumberland. 

Time. 

They  Flower  about  the  end  of  May,  and  * 
the  Seed  is  ripe  about  the  beginning  of  Jur 
ly. 

Venues  and  ufe. 

Both  the  Leavs  and  Roots  have  have  a  po¬ 
werful  faculty  to  refift  al  Poyfon :  The  Root  Poyfen, 
in  Pouder  taken  in  drink  expelleth  the  Venem  Plague, 
of  the  Plague,  the  final  Pox,  MeaxleSjPurples,  Smd pocl(S 
or  any  other  infeftious  Difeaf,  driving  it  out  Mea\les, 
by  fwcating  :  The  Root  in  Pouder  or  the  Purples, 
Decodion  therof  inWine  being  drunk,flayeth  Ppidemi- 
al  manner  of  inward  bleediqgs  or  fpittings  of  cal  pifed- 
Blood,  and  any  Fluxes  in,th'e  Bddy  of  either  fes. 

Man  or  Woman,  or  Vomitings  it  is  alfo  ve-  Inward 
ry  available  againft  Rupture|,or  Bur  flings,  or  bleeding, 
all  bruifes  or  fals,  diflblving  the  congealed  Plux,  Vo- 
Blood,  and  eafeth  the  pains  that  happen  there-  miting, 
upon,  it  alfo  helpeth  the  Jaundice.  The  Wa-  Ruptures  j 
H  KVjJaundice^ 


17 


The  Englijh  ^hyjitian. 


ter  diftilled  from  both  Leavs  and  ReotSj  is  i 
Vtntmtiis  fingular  remedy  to  wafti  any  place  bitten  or 
Beafts.  ftung  by  any  venemous  creature  j  as  alfo  for 
any  of  the  purpol^s  before  fpoken  of. 

And  is  vety  good  to  wafti  any  running  Sores 
IllcevS)  ov  Ulcers.  The  DecodioJi  of  the  Root  in 
Wine  being  drunkjhindreth  Abortion  or  Mif- 
AbomoUi  carriage  in  Child-bearing.  The  Leavs  alfo 
JVorm^  kil  the  Wornjs  in  Children^aj^  is  a  great  help 
ViabiteS}  fQj.  cannot  keep  their  Water,  if  the 

juyee  of  Plantanc  be  added  theito. ,  And  out- 
Kw/mg  <?/ wardiy  applied,  much  helpeth  ihs'Gonorrhca, 
the  Reins.l  or  running  of  the  Reins.  A  dram  of  the  Pou- 
der  of  the  Root  taken  in  the  Water  thereof, 
wherein  fom  red  hot  Iron  or  Steel  hath  been 
quenched  is  alfo  an  admirable  help  therctoj  fo 
as  the  Body  be  firft:  prepared  and  purged  from 
the«»offen^ve  humors.  The  Leaves,  Seed,  or 
,  Roots  are  al  very  good  in  Dccoftions, Drinks 
U  oundSi  for  inward  or  outward  Wounds 

or  other  fores  :  and  the  Pouder  ftrewed  upon 
,  ..  any  cut  or  wound  in  a  Vein,  ftaycththe  im- 
Blee  mgi  jnoderat  bleeding  thereof.  The  Decoftion  of 
the  Roots  in  W ater  whereunto  fomPoragra- 
•  nate  Pils  and  Flowers  are  added,  injected  into- 
^  the  Matrix, ftayeth  the  accefs  of  humors  to  the 
Ulcers  thereof.,  and  bringeth  it  to  its  right 
'Tei'tns  |)lacc,,BpihSi3B^^ ‘^own,  and  ftayeth  the  im- 
fiopty ,  moderat  flux  of  the  Courfes.  The  Root  here¬ 
of  with  Pellitory  of  Spain  and  burnt  Allum  of 
each  a  like  quantity,  beaten  fmal  and  made  in¬ 
to  Paft,  with  fome  Honey,  and  a  little  Piece 
thereof  put  into  an  hollow-Tooth,or  held  be- 
Tmh^dCha  tween  "the  Teeth  if  there  be  lio  hoHowncls  in 
them,  ftayeth  the  defluxion  of  Rhewm  upon 
Head  them,  which  caufeth  pains,  and  helps  to  clenfe 
the  Head,  jind  avoid  much  offenlive  Water. 
The  Diftilled  Water  is  very  effeftual  to  wafti 
Ca’fifieiSy  Sores  or  Cankers  inthe  Nofe  or  any  other 
part,  if  the  Pouder  of  the  Root  be  aplied  ther-  * 
Gums,  Ifi'  unto  afterwards.  It  is  good  alfo  to  faften  the 
flamations  Gums,  and  to  take  away  the  heat  and  inflama- 
Almondsof  tions  that  happen  in  the  Jaws,  Almonds  of  the 
the  Ears.  Throat  or  Mouth,  if  the  Decoftion  of  the 
Leavs,  Roots,  or  Seeds  be  ufed,  or  the  Juyee 
.  of  them  i  but  the  Roots  arc  moft  effcftuaLto 
all  the  purpofes  aforefaid. 

One-Blade. 

Defeription. 

'  fT^ His  fmal  Plant  never  beareth  more  than 
ii  one  Leaf,  but  only  when  it  rifes  up  with 
Its  Stalk  which  thereon  beareth  another,  and 
..  feldommord^  wBi^h  are  of  a  bluilh  green  co- 
dour,  broad  at  the  bottom  and  pointed  with 
’  '  many  Ribs*  or  Veins  like' Plantane  :  At^the 

j .  top  of  the  Stalk  grow  many  fmal  white  Flo- 
.  wers  Star-fafltion  fmelling  fomthing  fweet : 
aftet  which  come  fmal  reddifti  Berries  when 


they’  ane  ripe.  The  Root  is  fmal,  of  the  bignefs 
of  a  Rulh,  lying  and  creeping  under  the  upper 
eruft  of  the  Earth,  ftiooting  forth  in  diverfe 
places. 

Tlacc. 

It  groweth  in  moift  fliadowy,  gvalTie  places 
of  Woods  in  many  places  of  this  Realm. 

Time. 

It  flowreth  about  May,  and  the  Berries  be 
ripe  in  Jnne,  and  then  quickly  periftieth  until 
the  next  year  it  fpringth  from  the  fame  again. 

The  Vertues. 

Half  a  dram,or  a  dram  at  moft  of  the  Roots 
hereof  in  Pouder,  taken  in  Wine  and  Vineger 
of  each  a  like  quantity,  and  the  party  prefcntly 
laid  to  fweat,  is  held  to  be  a  fovereign  remedy 
for  thofe  that  are  infefted  with  theRague,and  pclliknce 
have  a  fore  upon  them,  by  expelling  the  Poy-  ^ 

fon  and  defending  the  Heart  and  Spirits  from  Wounds, 
danger :  it  is  alfo  accounted  a  fingular  good  Nervs. 
Wound-Herb ,  and  therfore  ufed  with  other  hurt. 
Herbs  in  making  fuch  Balms  as  are  neceifary 
for  the  curing  of  Wounds,  either  green  or  old, 
and  efpecially  if  the  Nervs  or  Sipews  be  hurt. 

The  Bramble j 

!Black=^enyi:SuJh, 

THis  is  fo  wel  known  that  it  ncedeth  no 
Deferption.  The  Vertues  therofareas 

followeth. 

Vertues  and  ufe. 

The  Buds,  Leavs  and  Branches  while  they 
are  green  are  of  a  good  ufe  in  the  Ulcers  and 
putrid  fores  of  the  Mouth  and  Throat,and  for 
the  Quinfie ;  and  likewife  to  heal  other  frefti 
Wounds  and  Sores ;  but  the  Flowers  &  Fruit 
unripe  are  very  binding,  and  fo  profitable  for  j  „ 
the  Bloudy-flux,  Lasks,  and  are  a  fit  remedy 
for  fpitting  of  Blbud.  Eithe*the  Decoftion 


or  Pouder  of  the  Root  being  taken  is  good  to 


break  or  drive  forth  Gravel,  and  the  Stone  in  ^  ’ 

the  Reins  and  Kidnies.  The  Leavs  and  Bram- 
bles  afwel  green  as  dry,  are  excellent  good  Lo- 
tions  for  fores  in  the  Mouth  or  fecret  parts : 

The  Decoftion  of  them  &  of  the  dried  Bran- 
cbes,do'much  bind  the  Belly,  and  are  good  for  Terms 
the  too  much  flowing  of  Womens  Courfes  :  flops. 

The  Berries  or  the  Flowers  are  a  powerful  re¬ 
medy  againft  the  Poyfon  of  the  moft  vene-  Toy  fon, 
mous  Serpents,  as  wel  drunk  as  outwardly  ap-  Venemous 
plied,  helpeththe  fores  of  the  Fundament,  and  Beafls. 
the  Piles,  The  Juyee  of  the  Berries  mixed  fundament 
with  Juyee  of  Mulberries,  do  bind  more  effe-  Tiles, 
dually,  and  help  fretting  and  eating  fores  and 
Ulcers  wherfoever.  The  Diftilled  Water  of 
the  Branches,  Leaves  and  Flowers,  or  of  the 
Fruit,  is  very  pleafam  in  taft,  and  very  effc- 

dual 


The  EngUjh  Thyfitian, 


i8 


Feaversj  ftual  in  Fcavers  and  hoi  diftempers  of 

Heady  dy^ Head,  Eyes  and  other  parts,  and  for  al  the 

Eyes,  purpofes  aforefaid.  The  Leaves  boylcd  in  Ly 

Itch,  Scab-  and  the  Head  waftied  therewith,  healeth  the 

hy  Heads.  Itch  and  the  running-fprestherof,  and  maketh 

the  Hair  black.  The  Ponder  of  the  Leaves 
ftrewed  on  cankrous  and  running  Ulcers^  doth 
wonderfully  help  to  heal  them.  Some  ufc  to 
condenfate  th£  juyee  of  the’Leaves,  andfome 
thejuyee  of  the  Berries  to  keep  for  their  ule 
all  the  year,for  the  piupofes  aforefaid. 

It  is  a  Plant  of  Venu^  in  Aties  :  You  (hall 
have  fom  Directions  at  the  latter  end  of  the 
Book  for  the  gathering  of  al  Herbs  and  Plants 
&c.  If  any  ask  the  Reafon  why  Venm  is  fo 
prickly  ?  Tel  them  ’tis  becaufefhe  is  in  the 
houkoi'^ia'/'s. 

Elites. 


O’ 


Ttefenption. 

|P  thefe  there  are  two  forts  commonly 
known,  Vi\.  White  and  Red.  The 
White  hath  Leavs  fomwhat  like  unto  Beets, 
but  fmaller,  rounder  and  of  a  whltilh  green  co¬ 
lour,  every  one  ftanding  upon  a  fmal  long 
Tootftalk:  The  Stalk  rifeth  up  two  or  three 
foot  high  with  fuch  like  Leavs  theron:  The 
Tlowers  grow  at  the  top  in  long  round  tufts  or 
clufters,wherein  are  contained  fmal  and  round 
Seed.  The  Root  is  very  full  of  threeds  or 
Jftrings. 

The  red  Blite  is  in  all  things  like  the  white, 
but  that  his  Leavs  and  tufted  heads  are  excee¬ 
ding  red  at  fiift,and  after  turn  more  Purplifh. 

TTere  are  other  kinds  of  Elites  which  grow 
wild,  differing  from  the  two  foriiler  forts  but 
little,  only  the  wild  are  fmaler  in  every  part. 

Place. 

They  grow  in  Gardens,  and  wild  in  many 
places  of  this  Land. 

■  Tme. 

They  feed  in  Auguft  and  September. 

Vertuesand  Ufe. 

They  are  all  of  them  cooling,  drying  and 
,  ,  binding,  fervirig  to  reftrain  the  Fluxes  of 

Keds  and  either  man  or  woman,  efpecially  the 

Whites  tn  which  alfo  fiayeththe  overflowing  of 

Women.  vvomen’s  Reds,  as  the  white  Elite  itayeth  the 
Whitjfs  in  Women.  It  is  an  excellent  feCret, 
you  cannpt  wel  fail  in  the  ufe  j  they  are  al  un¬ 
der  the  Domini o-n  oiV enm . 

*  There  is  one’ other  fort  of  wild  Blites,  like 
the  other  jvild  kinds,but  having  long  and  fpike 
heads  of  greenifh  Seed,  feeming  by  the  thick 
fetting  together  to  be  al  Seed. 

This  fort  the  Fifties  are  delighted  with,  and 
it  i?  a  good  and  ufual  Bait  3  for  Fifties  will 
bite  faff  enough  at  them,  if  you  have  but  wit 
enough  to  catch  therri  when  they  bite.‘ 


Borrage  3c  Buglofs. 

THcfe  are  fo  wel  known  to  be  Inhabitants 
in  every  Garden,  that  I  hold  it  needlefs 
to  deferibe  them. 

Time. 

They  flower  in  Jme  and  July,  and  the 
Seed  is  tipe  fhortly  after. 

Venues  and  Ufe. 

-  They  are  Very  Cordial.  The  Leaves  or 
Roots  are  to  very  good  purpofe  ufed  in  putrid 
and  Peftilehtial  Ffavers,  to  defend  the  Heart, 
and  hip  to  refift  and  expel  the  Poyfon,  or  the  p  [ 
Venom  of  other  Creatures  j  the  Seed  is  of  the 
likeeffefts  and  the  Seed  and  Leavs  are  good 
to  encreafe  Milk  in  Womens  Breaffs  :  The 


Leavs,  Flowers  and  Seed,  all,  or  any  of  them 
are  good  to  exf  el  Penfivenefs  and  Melanchol-  Se/iLba- 
ly;  ithelpethtoclarifie  theBloud,  and  mid- ?  ' 

gate  heat  in  Feavers.  The  Juyee  made  into  a 
Syrup  prevaileth  much  to  all  the  purpofes  a-  ^ 
forelaid,  and  is  put  with  other  cooling,  open¬ 
ing,  clenfing  Herbs,to  open  obffruClions,  and 
help  the  yellow-jaundice,  and.mixed  iVith  Fu-  •pellova^ 
rnitc^y,  to  cool,  clenf,  and  temper  the  Blood,  Jandice, 
^erby  it  helpeth  the  Itch,  Ringworms,  and  itch, Ring- 
1  etters,  or  other  Ipreading  Scabs  or  Sores,  tvorms. 
The  Flowers^  candied,  or  made  vito  a  Con-  Tetters  J 
ferve  are  helping  in  the  former  caufes,  but  are 
chiefly  ufed  as  a  Cordial,and  is  good  for  thofe 
that  are  weak  with  long  ficknefe,  and  to  com- 
fort  the  Heart  and  Spirits  of  thofe  that  are  in  a  ^ 
confumption,or  troubled  often  fwoonings 
orpaflions  ofthe  Heart ;  The  Diffilled  Wa- 
tcr  is  no  lels  effectual  to  all  the  purpofes  afore-  ^^°^3  ^ 
faid,  and’  helpeth  the  rednefsand  inflamati-  ^'^oomngy 
on  of  the  Eyes  being  waftied  therewith  :  The 
dried  Hab  is  never  ufed,  but  the  grfeen;  yet 
the  Afhes  therof  boyled  in  Mead,  or  Honyed  31  ore 
Water  is  available  againft  Inflamadoiis  dnd  youths 
Ulcers  in  the  Mouth  or  Throat,  to  wafli  and  ^"^oat, 
gargle  it  therewith.  The  Roots  of  Buglofl  are 
effectual  being  made  into  a  licking  EleCtUarie, 
for  the  Cough,  and  to  condenfate  thill  flegrh, 
and  Rhewmatick  Diffillatiohs  Upoh  the 
Lungs. 

They  are  both  Herbs  of  ind  under 

Lio,  both  great  Cordials,  great  ffrChgthners 
of  Nature. 

t 

Bluebottles. 

:  ( 

THefe  are  fo  wel  known  generally  unto  rily 
Country  mtn  to  'grow  am.png  their 
Corn,  thatIfuppofe,it  needleft  to  write  any 
DeTeription  therof;  There  are  other  kinds 


T4 


20 


Bruifes^ 
Brol^en 
Veins ^ 
Poyfoni 
Vlague, 
epidemi¬ 
cal  Difea- 
fes. 

Wounds, 
Ulcers, 
Jnflama- 
tions  in 
the  Eyes. 


The  Eiigiijl?  Ehyjitidn. 


which  I  purpofely  emit  both  in  this  and  c- 
thers5  rny  intent  being  only  to  infift  moft 
principally  upon  the  vulgarly  known  j  and 
commonly  growing  Flowers  and  Herbs.  , 

Time.  ' 

They  Flower  and  Seed  in  the  Summer 
Months.  f  I 

Venues  and  ufe.  ! 

The  Ponder  or  dried  Lcavs  of  the  Bluebot¬ 
tle,  or  Corii^cyvcs  is  giwen  with  good  fuccefs 
to  thofe  that  are  bruifcd  by  a  fal,  or  have  bro¬ 
ken  a  Vein  inwardly,  and  void  much  Blood  at 
the  Mouth,  being  taken  in  the  Water  of  Plan- 
tane,  Hor{lail,x)r  the  greater  Comfry.  It  is  a 
Remedy,  againft  the  Poyfon  of  the  Scorpion, 
and  rcfifteth  al  other  Venoms  and  Poyfonsj 
The  Seed  or  Leavs  taken  inWine  is  very  good 
againft  the  Plague,  and  al  infeftiqjgs  Difeafes, 
and  is  very  good  in  Peftilential  Feavers.  The 
juyee  put  into  frefti  or  green  Wounds  doth 
quickly  foder  up  the  Lips  of  them  together^ 
and  is  very  cffedual  to  heal  al  Ulcers  and  Sores 
in  the  Mouth  :  The  juyee  dropped  into  the 
Eyes,  taketh  away  the  heat  and  inflamation 
in  them.  The  diftilled  Water  of  the  Herb 
hath  the  fame  properties,  and  may  be  uled  for 
all  the  Effe^s  aiorefaid. 

Briony^  orVViUVine. 

pefeription.' 

T He  Common  white  Briony  groweth  ram¬ 
ping  upon  theHedges, fending  forth  many 
long  rough  very  [tender  branches  at  the  b^in- 
iiing,with  many  very  rough  broa^ Leavs  ther- 
W)n,cut(for  the  moft  part)  into  five  partitions, 
5n  form  very  like  a  Vine  Leaf,  but  fmaller, 
rougher,  -aud  ofawhitifh  or  hoary  green  co¬ 
lour,  Ipreading  very  far,  fpreading  and  twi¬ 
ning  with  his  final  Clafpers  (that  come  forth 
atthejoynts  with  the  Leavs)  very  far  on 
ivhatfoever  ftandeth  next  it :  At  the  feveral 
Joynts  alfo  (efpecially  towards  the  top  of  the 
Branches)  eometh  forth  a  long  Stalls  bearing 
^any  whitifti  Flowers,  together  in  a  long  tuft, 
tonfifting  of  five  final  Leaves  apiece  ,  laid 
^penrlike  a  Star  :  after  which  come  the 
ferries,  feparated  one  from  another  more  than 
a  Clufter  of  Grapes,  green  at  the  firft,  and  ve¬ 
ry  red  when  they  are  through  ripe,  of  no  good 
fent,  but  of  a  moft  loathfom  tail  provolking 
jVomit:  The  Root  groweth  to  be  exceeding 
great  with  many  long  Twines  or  Branches 
growing  from  it  of  a  pale  whitilh  colour  on  , 
the  outfide,  and  (more  white]  within,  and  of  a 
Ibarp,  bitter  loathfom  tall. 

Vlace. 

It  '■groweth  orijjjBanks,  or  under  Hedges, 
through  ^isLanltk&QOts  lie  very  deep.  ^ 


Time. 

It  Flowrcth  in  July  and  Auguft,  fem  earlier 
and  feme  later  than  others. 

Venues  and  Z>fc. 

The  Roots  of  the  Briony  purge  the  Belly  Talling- 
with  great  Violence,  troubling  the  Stomach, 
and  hurting  the  Liver,  and  therfore  not  rail.-  Vntigo, 
ly  to  be  taken,  but  being  correfted  is  very  pro-  Tlcgm, 
fitable  for  the  Difeafes  of  the  Head,  as  Fal-  Paijies, 
ling-ficknefs,  Giddinefs,  and  Swimmings,  by  Convulfion 
drawing  away  much  Flcgm  and  Rhcwmatick  Cramp, 
humors  that  opprefs  the  Head,  as  alfo  the  Stitches, 
Joynts  and  Sinews,  and  is  therfore  good  for  Droppes, 
Palfeys,  Convulfions,  Cramps,  and  Stitches  Gravel, 
in  the  Sides,  and  the  Dropfie  j  and  in  pro-  ^tone, 
voking  Urin  it  clenfeth  the  Reins  and  Kidnics  ObliruSii- 
from  Gravel  and  the  Stone,  by  opening  the  , 
Obftrudlions  of  the  Spleen,  and  confumeth  ^  omb,Mo~ 
the  hardnefs  and  fwellings  therof.  The  Dc-  thcr,I)eacl 
ceftion  of  the  Root  in  Wine  drunk  Once  a 
week  at  going  to  bed,  clenfeth  the  Mother,and  ter-birth. 
helpeth  the  riling  therof,  expelleth  the  dead 
Child,  and  Afterbirth,  but  is  not  to  be  ufed 
by  Wemen  with  Child,  fyr  fear  of  abortion  ; 
a  dram  of  the  Root  in  Pouder  taken  in  white 
Wine  bringeth  down  their  Courfes.  An  E- 
Jeduary  made  of  the  Roots  and  Honey,  doth 
mightily  clenf  the  Cheft  of  Rotten  Flegm, 
and  wonderfully  help  an  old  ftreng  Cough, 
thofe  fhat  arc  troubled  with  Ihortnefs  of 
Breath,  and  is  very  good  for  them  that  are  bru- 
fed  inwardly,  to  help  to  expel  the  clotted^or 
congealed  Blood.  The  Leavs,  Fruit,  and 
Root,  do  clenf  old  and  filthy  Sores,  are  good 
againft  al  fretting  and  running  Cankers,  Gan¬ 
grenes,,  and  Tetters,  and  therfore  the  Berries 
are  by  fome  Country  People  called  Tetter- 
Berries.  The  Root  efenfeththe  Skin  wonder¬ 
fully  from  al  black  and  blew  Spots,  Freckles, 

Morphewh,  Leprofie,  foul  Scars,  or  other  de-  ^  . 

fbrmity  whatfoever  :  as  alfo  al  running  Scabs,  . 
and  Manginefs  are  healed  by  the  Pouder  of  the  ^P'^^pc. 
dried  Root,  or  the  Juyee  therof,  but  efpecially 
by  thf  fine  white  hardned  Juyee  :  The  diftil¬ 
led  water  of  theRoots  worketh  the  fame  efFedls 
but  more  weakly.  The  Root  bruifed  and  ap¬ 
plied  of  it  felf  to  any  place  where  the  Bones  are 
broken,  helpeth  to  draw  them  forth,  as  alfo 
Splinters  and  Thorns  in  the  Flefti  5  and  be¬ 
ing  applied  with  a  little  Wine  mixed  therwith 
it  breaketh  Boyls,  and  helpeth  Whitlows  on 
the  Joynts. 

For  al  thefe  latter  beginning  at  Sores,  Can¬ 
kers  &c.  apply  it  outwardly  and  take  my  ad¬ 
vice  along  with  you,you  fhal  find  in  my  Tratir- 
flauon  of  the- London  Vijpenfatory,  among 
the  Preparations  at  latter  end,  a  Mcdkin  cal¬ 
led  Feeculee  BThnitc,  take  that  and  ufe  it,  you 
have  the  way  there  how  to  make  it,  and  mix 
that  with  a  little  Hogs  Grcaf  or  other  conve¬ 
nient  Oyntment,  and  ufe  it  at  your  need.  * 

I  As  for  the  former  Difeafes  where  it  muft  be 
tj^cn  inwardly,  itpurgethvery  Violentlyjand 
"  '  nepds 


Cough  , 
Shdrtncf 
of  Breath, 
Sores,Can- 
l(ers.  Gan¬ 
grenes, 
Tetters, 
Ring¬ 
worms, 
Blacli 
Spots, 
Trecl{les, 


Broken 
Bones, 
Splinters 
1  horns, 
whitlowsj 
or  Nail- 
wbeals,  or 
Andicoms. 


The  Englijh  ^hyjttian. 


Zi 


needs  an  abler  hand  to  correft  it  than  naoft 
Country  people  have>  therfore  it  is  a  better 
way  for  them  (in  my  opinion)  to  let  the  Sim¬ 
ple  alonCj  and  take  the  Compound  Water  of 
it,  mentioned  in  my  and  that  is 

far  more  fafe,  being  wifely  correded. 

Brooklime. 

T>efcnptio'a> 

THisfendeth  forth  from  ^  creeping  Root, 
that  fhooteth  forth  firings  at  every  Joynt 
as  it  runneth,  diverf  and  fundiy  green  Stalks, 
rounS  and  fappy  with  fomc  branches  on  them, 
ibmwhat  broad,  round,  deep  green,  and  thick 
Leavs  fet  by  couples  theron :  from  the  Bofom 
wherot  fhoot  forth  long  Bootfialks,  with  fun- 
dry  final  blue  Blowers  on  them,  that  confift  of 
five  final  round  pointed  Leavs  apiece. 

There  is  another  fort  nothing  differing  from 
the  former,  but  that  it  is  greater,  and  the  Flo-  • 
wers  of  a  pier  blue  Colour. 

Place. 

They  grow  in  Imal  ftanding  W aters,  and  u- 
fually  ncer  Watercreffes. 

Time. 

■And  Flowef  in  June  and  July,  giving  Seed 

the  next  Month  after. 

Venues  and  life.  • 

Erookl'me  and  Watercreffes  are  generally  u- 
Blood  pur-  fed  to<^ether  in  Diet  Drinks  with  other  things, 

geth,  id  ferving  to  purge  the  Blood  and  Body  from  ill 

Humors,  Humors  that  would  defiroy  health,  and  are 
Scurvy,^  helpful  for  the  Scurvy  :  They  do  alfo  provoke 
Vifury,  and  help  to  break  the  Stone  and  pafs  it 

Stone,  away  j  they  procure  WomensCourles,and  ex— 

Terms  pel  the  dead  Child.  Being  fried  with  Butter 
frevol(es,  and  Vinet^ar  and  applied  warm,  it  helpeth  ill 
Deadehiid  manner  of  Tumors  or  Swellings,  and  Infla- 
SweUings,  mations. 

Inflamo!-  drinks  ought  to  be  made  of  Sundry 

tions.  Herbs  according  to  the  Malady  offending,  I 
(hal  give  a  plain  and  eafie  Rule  ^t  the  latter 
end  of  the  Book. 

Butchers-Broom.  . 

Vefeription. 

He  firft  (hoots,  that  fprout  from  the  Root 
of  Butchers-Broom  are  thick,  whitilh, 
andlhort,  fomwhat  like  thofe  ofAfparagus, 
but  greater :  thefc  rifing  up  to  be  a  foot  and  an 
half  high  are  fpread  into  diverf  Branches, 
green  &  fomwhat  crefied  with  the  roundnefs, 
tough  and  flexible,  wheron  are  fet  fomwhat 
broad  and  almofi  round  hard  Leavs,  (harp  and 
prickly  pointed  at  the  ends,  of  a  dark  green  co¬ 


lour,  two  for  the  moft  part  fet  at  a  place,  very 
clofe  or  ncer  together  j  about  the  middle  of 
the  Leaf,  on  the  back  or  lower  fide  from  the 
middle  Rib,  breaketh  forth  a  final  whitifli 
green  Flower  confifiing  of  four  final  round 
pointedLeavs  (landing  upon  little  or  no  Foot- 
ftalk,  and  in  the  place  wherof  cometh  a  final 
round  Bcrry,greeu  at  tfle  firft,  and  red  when  it 
is  ripe,  wherinaretwo  or  three  whitp,  hard, 
round  Seeds  contained  ;  The  Root  is  thick, 
white,  and  great  at  the  Head,  and  from  thence 
fendeth  forth  diverf  thick,  white,  long,  tough 
firings. 

Plate. 

It  groweth  in  Copfes,  and  upon  Heaths  and 
waft  grounds,  and  oftentimes  under  or  necr 
the  HoUy-Buihes.  ' 

Time. 

It  (hooteth  forth  his  yong  buds  in  the  Spring  « 
and  the  Berries  are  ripe  in  or  about  September, 

The  Branches  and  Leavs  abiding  green  al  the 
Winter. 

VerUtes  and  ufe. 

The  Decoftion  of  the  Roots  made  with 
Wine,  openeth  Obftrufti'ons,  provoketh  U-  Obfiru^i- 
rin,  helpeth  to  expel  Gravel  and  the  Stone, 
the  Strangury,  and  Womens  Courfes,  as  alfo 
theyellow  Jaundice  and  the  Hcad^ach,  and 
with  fomc  Honey  or  Sugar  put  therunto,  ejen*- 
feth  the  Bread  of  Flegm,  and  the  Cheft  of 
much  clammy  Humors  gathered  therin.  The 
Decoiftion  of  the  S^pots  drank,  apd  a  Pultjs  provo\es, 
made  of  the  Beriies  and  Leavs  being  applied,  Jedotv- 
arc  effectual  tn  knitting  and  confolidating 
broken  Bones  and  Parts  out  of  Joynt.  Headach,^ 

It  is  called  Brufeus  in  feme  places,  and  in 
S«j/car  KneehoUy,  and  Kneeholm.  The  com- 
mon  way  of  ufing  it  is  to  boyl  the  Roots  of  it  Fewer, 
and  Parfly,  and  Fennel, and  Smallage  in  white  ^^flocatt- 
Wine,  and  drink  the  Deco dion,  adding  the 
like  quantity  of  Grafs  Roots  to  themj  the 
more  of  the  Roots  you  boyl  the  ftronger  will 
the  Deeoftion  be,  it  works  no  ill  effefts,  yet 
I  h»pe  you  have  wit  enough  to  give  the  fltron- 
geft  Decodion  to  the  ftrongeft  Bodies. 

Broom,  &  Broorr.rape. 

To  fpendtime  in  writinz  a  Deferiptjon 
hcrof  is  altogether  needicfs,  it  being  fo 
generally  ufed  by  all  the  good  Hufwifes  al- 
moft  through  this  Land  to  fweep  their  Houfes 
with,  and  therfore  very  wel  known  to  all  forts 
of  people. 

'ThtBroomrape  fpringeth  up  in  many  pla¬ 
ces  from  the  Roots  of  the  Broom  (but  more 
often  in  fields,  by  Hedg  fides,  and  on  Heaths) 

The  Stalk  wherof  is  of  the  bigneJs  of  a  Fin- 
Zer  or  Thumb,  above  two  Foot  high  having  a 
fliow  of  Leavs  on  them  and  many  Flowers  at 
I  the 


2Z 


Flegmy 

Joynts, 

Dropfie, 

Sides  3 

Spleen, 

Bladder, 

Kidneys, 


Agues. 


the  tcpj  cf  a  deadifh,  yellow  colcur,as  alfo  the 
Stalks  and  Leavs  are. 

Tlace. 

They  grew  in  many  places  cf  this  Land 
ccmmcnly,  and  as  cctr.mcnly  fpqyl  all  the 
Land  they  grew  in. 

Time. 

And  Flower  in  the  Sunttner  McntJrSj  and 
give  their  Seed  before  W  inter. 

Vertues  and  ufe. 

The  juyee,  or  Dcccdiicn  of  the  yong  Bran- 
chesj  or  Seedj  or  the  Pouder-of  the  Seed  taken 
in  Drink,  purgeth  downwards,  and  draweth 
Flegmatick  and  watery  humors  from  the 
Joynts,  w'herby  it  heipeth  the  Dioplie,  Gout, 
Sciatica,  and  the  pains  in  the  Hips  andjoynts: 
It  alfo  provoketh  ftrong  Vomits,  and  heipeth 
the  pains  of  the  Sides,  3n4  fwellings  of.  the 
Spleen,  clenfeth  alfo  the  Reins,  or  Kidnies 
-  -  and  Bladder  of  the  Stone,  provoketh  Ui  in  a- 

fone,  Dt-  bundantly,  and  hindreth  the  growing  again 
ofthe  Stone  in  the  Body.  The  continual  ufe 
jau?jatce,  of  the  Pouder  of  the  Leaves  and  Seed,  doth 
cure  the  Black  Jaundice:  The  diftilled  Wa¬ 
ter  ofthe  Flowers  is  profitable  for  al  the  fame 
purpcles  5  it  alfo  helpeth>Surfets,  and  altcreth 
the  Fits  of  Agues,  if,  three  or  four  ounces 
therof,  with  as  much  of  the  Water  of  the  Icl- 
fer  Centaury  and  a  little  Sugar  put  therin,  be 
taken  a  little  before  the  fit  cometh,  and  the 
party  be  laid  down  to  fweat  in  their  Bed.  The 
Oyl  or  Water  that  is  drawn  from  the  ends  of 
the  green  flicks  heated  in  the#fire,  heipeth  the 
Toothach.  Thejuyee  of  the  yong  Branches 
made  into  an  Oyment  of  old  Hogs  Greaf  and 
anointed.  Or  the  yong  Branches  bruifed  and 
heated  in  Oyl  or  Hogs  Grcaf^  and  laid  to  the 
Sides  pained  by  wind,  as  in  Stitches,  or  the 
Spleen,  eafeth  them  in  once  or  twice  ufing  it ; 
The  fame  boyled  in  Oyl  is  the  fafcfl  and  fu- 
refl  Medicine  to  kil  Lice  in  the  Head  or  Bo¬ 
dy  of  any  5  and  is  an  efpecial  Remedy  for 
Joynt  aches,  and  fwoln  Knees  that  come  by  the 
falling  down  of  Humors.  ' 

'IhcBroomrape  alfo  is  not  without  his  Ver- 
tues. 

The  Decoftion  therof  in  Wine  is  thought 
to  be  ascffeftual  to  avoid  the  Stone  in  the 
Kidnies  and  Bladder,  and  to  provoke  Urin,  as 
the  Broom  it  k\( :  Thejuyee  therof  is  a  fiji- 
gular  good  help  to  cure  as  wel  green  Wounds, 
as  old  and  filthy  Sores,  and  malignant  Ulcers. 
The  infolate  Oyl  wherin  there  hath  been 
three  or  four  Repetitions  of  Infuficn  of  the 
top  flalks  with  Flowers  flrained  and  cleered, 
clenfeth  the  Skin  of  al  manner  of  Spots, Marks 
and  Freckles  that  arife  either  by  the  heat  of 
the  Sun,  or  the  Malignity  of  humors. 

As  for  the  Broom  (for  as  yet  I  know  not 
what  to  fay  to  Broomrape  in  the  buCnefs)  but 
Biiox  Broom,  Man  owns  it,  and  it  is  exccc- 


Tootbacb. 


IBind, 

Stitches, 

Lice. 


Stone, 

Vifu'cy, 

Green 

Wounds, 


I  ding  prejudicial  to  the  Liver,  I  fuppofe  by 
I  Reafcn  of  the  Antipathy  between and 
Mars,  theifore  if  the  Liver  be  dilaflededjad- 
minifler  none  of  it. 

^  ^  ^  ^  «i5c  *1?  4^* 

Bucks-horn  Plantane. 

Vefeription. 

^His  being  fown  of  Seed,  rileth  up  at  the 
firfl  with  final,  long,  narrow  hairy  dark 
green  Leavs  lik^grafs,  without  any  divificn  or 
gafh  in  them  j  but  thofe  that  follow  are  ga- 
Ihed  in  on  both  fides  the  Leavs  into  three  or 
fourgalhes,  and  pointed  at  the  ends,  refem- 
bling  the  Knags  of  a  Bucks  Horn  (wherof  it 
took  the  name)  and  being  well  grown  round 
about  the  Root  upon  the  ground,  in  order  one 
by  another  therby  refembling  the  form  of  a 
Star :  from  among  which  rife  up  diverf  hairy 
Stalks,  about  a  hand  breadth  high,  bearing  e- 
very  one  a  Imial  long  fpiky  Headlike  to  thofe 
of  the  common  Flantanc,  having  fuch  like 
Bloomings  and  Seed  after  them.  The  Root 
is  Angle,  Tong,  and  final,  with  diverf  firings  at 
it. 

Flace. 

They  grow  in  dry  Sandy  grounds,  as  .in 
Tuttle-Fields  by  mftminfier,  and  diverf  other 
places  of  this  Land.  y  ^ 

Time.  ' 

They  Flower  and  Seed  in  May,  June,  and 
July,  and  their  green  Leavs  do  in  a  manner 
abide  frefh  al  the  Winter. 

Vertues  and  iife. 

This  boyled  in  Wine  and  drunk,  and  fome 
of  the  Leavs  applied  to  the  hurt  pi  ace, is  an  ex-  F^^riemosis 
ccllent  remedy  f^or  the  biting  ofthe  Viper  or  Feafis, 
Adder  which  I  take  to  be  one  and  the  fame  : 

The  fame  being  alfo  drunk  heipeth  thofe  fhat  Stomach, 
are  troubled  with  the  Stone  in  the  Veins  or  F'omitingy 
Kidnies  by  cooling  the  heat  of  the  parts  affli-  Fleedingy 
died  flrengthning  them :  as  alfo  weak  Sto-  ^iJTwg 
machs  that  ^cannot  retain  but  cafl  up  thtiy^^^^Flux 
Meat.  It  flayeth  al  bleedings  at  Mouth  and 
Nofc,  bloody  Urin,  or  the  Bloody  Flux,  and  Flux, 
floppeththe  Lask  of  the  Belly  and  Bowels. 

The  Leavs  herof  bruifed  and  laid  lo  their  fides  Fyes.  ^ 
that  have  an  Ague,  fuddenly  eafeth  the  Fit : 
and  the  Leavs  and  Roots  beaten  with  fome 
Bay  Salt  and  applied  to  theWrifls,  worketh 
the  fame  effcdls.  The  Herb  boyled  in  Ale  or 
Wine  and  given  for  feme  mornings  and  eve¬ 
nings  together,  flaieth  the  diflillaticns  cf  hot 
and  fharp  Rhewms  falling  into  the  Eyes  frem 
the  Head,  and  heipeth  al  forts  of  fore  Eyes. 

Venus  challcn2;eth  the  Dcminicn  of  this 
Herb. 


Bugle 


The  Englijh  E’hyfttian. 


.  Bugle. 

Vefcnpion. 

■  His  hath  larger  Leavs  than  thcfe  of  the 


I  boyled  in  Hogs-GrcafjuntU  the  Herbs  be  dry^ 
and  then  ftrained  forth  into  a  Pot, for  fuch  oc- 
cafions  as  ftial  reqwire  it,  is  fo  fingular  goo^ 
for  al  forts  of  hurts  in  the  Body,  that  non  that 
know  its  ufefulifcfs  will  be  without  it. 

This  Herb  is  belonging  to  Dame  j/^«w,an<l 
if  tfre  Vertues  of  it  make  you  in  love  with  it, 

THis  hath  larger  JLeavs  man  tncie  or  me  i  (as  they  wil  if  you  be  wife)  keep  a  Syrup  of  it 
S£//lbe«/,  bdtelfofthcfame  fafhion,  or !  to  take  inwardly,  and  an  Ointment  and  Plai- 
rather  a  little  longer,  in  feme  gieen  on  i  fter  of  it  to  ufe  outwardly  aiwaies  by  you. 
the  upper  fide,  and  in  others  more  brownifh,  1  The  truth  is,  1  have  known  this  Herb  cure 
dented  about  the  edges,  fomwhat  hairy,  as  the  j  fomc  Difeafes  of  Saturn,  of  which  I  thought 
fquare  Stdk  is  alfo,  which  rjfeth  up  to  be  half  ]  good  to  quote  one.  Many  times  fuch  as  give 
a  vatd  high  fomtimes,  with  the  Leavs  fet  by  |  themfelvs  much  to  drinking  are  troubled  wth 
couples  i  from  the  middle  almoit  whereof  up- j  ftrange  Pancies,  ftrange  fights  in  the  mght- 
wards  hand  the  Plowcrs  together,  with  many  I  time,  and  fome  with  Voices,  as  alfo  With  the 
fmaler  and  browner  Leaves  than  the  reft  on;  Difeaf£p/;iii/to  or  tMare.Itakethe  reafon 
this  ftalk  below,  fet  at  diftances,  and  the  ftalk  j  of  this  to  be  (according  toFfr»£/w)a  Mel^- 
bar<  between  them^  among  which  Flowers  are  j  cholly  vapor  made  thin  by  excefuve  drinking 
alfp'final  ones  of  a  bluiih,  and  fomtimes  of  an.;  ftrong  Liquor,  and  fo  flyes  up  and  difturbs  the 
Am  coloutj  fafhioned  like  the  Flowers  of  the  j  Fancy^  and  biceds  imaginations  like  itfelr) 
G'found-Ivy^  after  which  come  fmall>round,  j  fearful  and  troublcfom :  Thele  I  have 
blackifh  Seed.  The  Root  is  compofed  of  ma-  j  known  cured  by  taking  only  two  fpoonfuls  of 
ny  firings,  and  fpreadeth  upon  the  ground  in  the  Syrup  of  this  Herbjafter  Supper  two  hours 


CMmSi 
Strange 
Sights  in 
the  nighu 


Bruifes, 
Falls, 
Wounds, 
Scabs, 
Ulcers, 
Liver ~ 
grown, 
Cange  eons 
Fiflulaes, 
Sore 

Mouths, 

Gums. 

Sores  in 

theSecrets, 

brol^en 

bones. 


diverf  parts  round  about 
'The  white- flowered  Bugle  djffereth  not  in 
form  or  greatnefs  from  the  fornler,  faving  that 
the-Leavs  and  Stalks  arc  alwaies  green  and  ne¬ 
ver  brown  like  the  other,  and-that  the  Flowers 
xherof  are  very  white. 

Place-  1  i 

They  grow  inWoodsjWet  Copfes,and  Fields 
generally  throughout  England ;  but  the  White 
flowered  Bugle  is  not  fo  plentiful  as  the  other. 

Time-. 

They  flower  from  until and  in 
the  mean  time  perfect  their  Seed.  The  Roots 
and  Leavs  next  therunto  upon  the  ground  abi¬ 
ding  all  Winter. 

Vertues  and  ufe- 

The  Decoftion  of  the  Leavs  and  Flowers 
made  in  Wine  and  taken  dilfolveth  the  conge- 
led  Blood  in  thofe  that  are  bruifed  inwardly  by 
a  fall  or  otherwife,  and  is  very  effedtual  for 
any  inward  WoundsjThrufts  or  Stabs  into  the 
Body  or  Bowels,  and  is  an  elpecial  help  in  all 
Wound-drinks,  and  for  thofe  that  are  Liver- 
grown  (as  they  cal  it.)  It  is  wonderful  in  cu¬ 
ring  all  manner  of  Ulcers  and  Sores  whether 
new  and  frefh,  or  old  and  inveterate,  yea  Gan¬ 
grenes  and  Eiftulaes  alfo,  if  the  Leavs  bruifed 
be  aplied,  or  their  juyee  ufed  to  walh  and  bath 
the  places.  And  the  fame  made  into  a  Lotion 
with  Tome  Honey  and  Allum,  cureth  all  fores 
of  the  Mouth  or  Gums  be  they  never  fo  foul, 
or  of  long  continuance  i  and  worketh  no  lefs 
powerfully  and  effeflually  for  fuch  Ulcers  and 
Sores  as  happen  in  the  fecrct  parts  of  Men  or 
Women ;  Being  alfo  taken  inwardly,  and  out¬ 
wardly  applied,  it  helpeth  thofe  that  have  bro- 


when  you  go  to  bed.  But  whether  this  do  it 
by  Sympathy  or  Antipathy  is  fom  queftion  5  all 
that  know  any  thing  in  -Aftrologie,  know  that 
there  is  a  great  Antipathy  between  SaWen  and 
Venus  \n  matter  of  Procreation,  yea  fuch  an 
one,  that  the  battenefs  of  Saturn  can  be  remo¬ 
ved  by  none  but  Venus,  nor  the  luft  of  Venus 
be  repelled  by  none  but  :  but  I  am  not 

yet  of  opinion  this  is  done  this  way  >  and  my 
reafon  is,  becaufe  thefc  vapors  though  in  qua¬ 
lity  Melancholly,  yet  by  their  flying  upward 
[eemtoiDtiomx.h\ng  Acrid,  therforcl  rathcc 
think  it  is  done  by  Sympathy,y^t«/-»  being  ex¬ 
alted  in  Libra  the  houfo  of  Venus. 

Scli)}ed,'fih\ch  follows,is  of  the  fame-nature, 
and  I  am  of  opinion  the  fame  Herb,  only  dif¬ 
fers  a  little  in  form  according  to  the  difference 
of  place  they  grow  in  5  this  I  am  furc  they 
work  the  fame  effed. 

Burnet. 


T 


.V 


'i'- 


He  common  Garden  Burnet  is  fo  well 
known  ,  that  it  needeth  no  defeription. 
There  is  another  fort  which  is  wild,  the 
defeription  wherof  take  as  followeth . 

Defeription. 

The  great  wild  Burnet,  hath  winged  Leavs 
rifing  from  the  Roots  like  the  Garden  Burner, 
but  not  fo  many,  yet  each  of  thcfe  Leavs  are 
at  the  Icaft  twice  as  large  a&ihe  other,  atid  nic¬ 
ked  in  the  fame  manner  about  the  edges,  of  a 
grayifh  colour  on  the  underfide :  The  Stalks 


ken  any  Bone,  or  have  any  Member  out  of  1  are  greater  and  rife  higher,witb  many  fuch  like 
joynt.  Anointment  made  with  the'^Leaves  Leavs  fet  theron,  and  greater  heads  at  the  tops 
of  Bugle,  Scabious  and  Sanicle  bruifed  and  of  a  brownifh  green  colour,  and  out  of  them 

I  z  come 


come  fm4  purple  Flowers,  like  the  for¬ 
mer,  but  greater.  The  Root  is  black  and  long 
like  the  other,  but  greater  alfo  :  It  hath  al- 
m^oft  neither  fcent  nor  taft  therin  like  the  Gar¬ 
den  kind. 

Place. 

Th^  firft  grows  frequently  in  Gardens.  The 
Wild  kind  groweth  in  diverf  Countries  of  this 
Land,  elpecially  in  Huntington  8c  ’2^onhamp-y 
ton  Jhircs  in  the  Meadows  there  J  as  alfo  near 
London  by  Pancras-Church,  and  by  a  Caufey 
fide  in  the  middle  of  a  Field  by  'Paddington. 

Time: 

They  flower  about  the  end  of  June  and  be¬ 
ginning  of  July,  and  their  Seed  is  ripe  in  Au- 
guft. 

Venues. 

They  ai  c  accounted  to  be  both  of  one  pro¬ 
perty,  but  the  lefler  is  more  effedlual,  becaufe 
Heart,  quicker  and  more  Aromatical :  It  is  a  friend' 
Liver,  to  the  Heart,  Liver,  and  other  the  principal 
Melancho-  parts  of  a  mans  Body.  Two  or  three  of  the 
ly.  Stalks  with  Leavs  put  into  a  Cup  of  Wine,  e- 

Peftilence,  fpecidly  Clarret,  arc  known  to  quicken  the 
^epidemical  SpiritSi  refrefli  and  cheer  theTIeart  and  drive 
Difeafes,  away  Melancholly.  It  is  a  Ipecial  help  to  de- 
deeding,,  fend  the  Heart  from  noifom  vaporsj  and  from 
Stoppeth  Infeftion  of  the  Peftilence,  the  Juyce  thcrof 
Terms  and  being  taken  itl  fom  Daink^  and  the  party  laid 
whites,  to  fweat  thereupon.  They  have-alfo  a  drying 
Belching,  and  an  •  afif ingent  qhality,  whereby  they  are  a- 
Vomiting,  vaijable  in  all  manner  of  Fluxes  ofBloud  or 
Wounds,  Humors,  to  ftanch  bleedings  inward  or[out- 
lllcers,  ward,  Lasks,  Scourings,  the  Bloudy-flux,Wo- 
C angers,  mens  too  abundant  Courfes,  the  Whites,  and 
Sores,  the  Chollerick  belchings  and  caftings  of  the 
P luxes.  Stomach  f  and  is  a  fingular  good  Wound- herb 

for  all  forts  of  Wounds  both  of  the  Head 
and  Body,  eifher  inward  or  outward  j  for  all 
old  Ulcers,  or  runningCankers  and  moift  fores 
to  be  uied  either  by  the  Juyce  or  Dfcoftion 
of  the  'Herb,  or  by  the  Pouder  qf  the  Herb  or 
Root,  or  the  Water  of  the  Diftilled  Herb,  or 
Ointment  by  it  fclf,  or  with  other  things  to 
.  be  kept.  The  Seed  is  alfo  no  lefs  efledual  both 
to  flop  Fluxes  and  dry  up  moift  Sores,  being 
taken  in  Pouder  inwardly,  in  Wine  orfteeled 
W ater,  that  is,  wnef  in  hot  Gads  of  Steel  have 
been  quenched.  Or  the  Pouder  of  the  Seed 
mixed  With  the  Ointments. 

This  is  an  Herb  the  Sun  challengeth  domi¬ 
nion  over,  anfl  is  a  moft  precious  Herb,  little 
inferior  to  Betony".  The  continual  ufe  of  it 
prefervs  the  Body  in  health,  and  the  Spirits  in 
vigor  j  for  if  the  Sun  be  the  preferver  of  life 
uhder  Godjhis  Herbs  are  the  beft  in  theWorld 
40  do  it  by*;  ^ 


Thyjitian, 


The  Biitter^Biir. 

Defeription. 

His  rifeth  up  in  Felrntary,  with  a  thick 
Stalk  about  a  foot  high,  whereon  are  fet  a 
few  fmal  Leavs,  or  rather  pieces,  and  at  the 
tops  a  long  Ipiked  head  of  Flowers,  of  a  blufti 
or  deep  red  colour,according  to  the  foil  wherin 
it  groweth  j  and  before  the  Stalk  with  the  Flo¬ 
wers  have  abidden  a  month  above  ground,  wil 
be  withered  and  gone,  blown  away  with  the 
wind  j  and  the  Leaves  will  begin  to  fpring, 
which  being  ful  grown  arc  Very  Targe  &  broad, 
being  fomwhat  thin  and  almoft  round,  whofe 
thick  red  footftalks, about  a  foot  long  ftand  to¬ 
wards  the  middle  of  the  Leavs:  The  lower 
parts  being  divided  into  two  round  parts,  clofe 
almoft  one  to  another,  and  of  a  pale  green  co¬ 
lour,  and  hoary  underneath.  The  Root  is  long 
and  fpreading  under  ground,  being  in  fome 
places  no  bigger  than  ones  Finger,  in  others 
much  bigger,  blackifh  on  the  outfide  &  white 
within,  of  a  bitter  and  unpleafant  taft.^ 

Plitce  zsidTime. 

They  grow  in  low  and  wet  grounds  by  Ri- 
vcrs'‘and  Waters  fide :  their  Flower  (as  is  faidj 
fifing  and  decaying  in  Februoiy  and  March, 
before  the  Leavs  which  appear  in  .April. 

Venues  and  ufe. 

The  Roots  hereof  are  by  long*  experience 
found  to  be  very  available  againft  <he  Plague  73/4^^^ 
and  Peftilential  Feavers,  by  provoking  Sweat, 
if  the  Pouder  therof  be  taken  in  Wine ,  it  alfo  SX 
refifteth  the  force  of  any  other  Poyfon.  The  ''Poyton  * 
Root  hereof  taken  with  Zedoary  and  .Ange-  Mother 
lica ,  or  without  them,  helps  the  rifing  of  the  wheexMr 
Mother  ;  The  Decodion  of  the  Root  in  Difficult^ 
Wine  is  fingular  good  for  thofe  that  wheeze  qJ'  ijYea- 
muchjor  are  ftiort- winded.  It  provoketh  Urin  thing, 
alfo  and  Womens  courfes,  and  killeth  the  flat 
and  broad  Worms  in  the  Belly*  The  Pouder  Terms 
of  the  Root  doth  wonderfully  help  to  dry  up  provol^es, 
the  moifture  of  fores  that  are  hard  to  be  cured,  pi^t  and 
and  taketh  away  all  fpots  and  blemiflies  of  the  troad 
skin.  ^  <fsi  _  Warms, 

It  were  Wcl  if  Gentlewomen  would  keep  this  Blemifhes 
Root  prcferved,to  help  their  poor  Neighbors:  of  the  sl(in 
It  is  fit  the  Pfeh  (hould  help  the  Poor,  for  the 
Poor  cannot  help  themfelvs.  ' 


The 


25 


The  EngUJh  J'hyjiti'an. 

- - - - 1 


\ 


Cools  J 

VryeSi 

nioerSi 

SoreSi 

Tlegrrii 

Sinevps, 

Arteries, 


Venemom 

Beufts, 

Mad  dogs, 

Vifury, 

Bladder, 

Sciatica^ 

Burning, 


Sons, 

Conifers, 


Ceajkmp- 

tion. 

Stone, 

Flux* 


The  Bur- Dock. 

»  a 

IT  is  fo  well  known  even  to  the  little  Boys 
who  pul  ofF  the  Burs  to  throw  and  ftick  up¬ 
on  one  another,  that  I  lhal  fpare  to  write  any, 
(Icfcription  of  it. 

Vlact. 

They  grow  plentifully  by  Ditches  and  Wa- 
ter-fidesj  and  bythe  Hi^-waies  almoft  every 
wherethrough  this  Land. 

Vertues  and  ufe. 

The  Bur  Leavs  are  cooling,  moderatly  dry¬ 
ing,  and  difeuffing  withal,  whereby  it  is  good 
for  old  Ulcers  and  Sores:  A  dram  of  the  Roots 
taken  with  Pine  Kernels,  helpcth  them  that 
fpit  foul,  mattery,  and  bloudy  Flegm  :  The 
Leavs  applied  on  the  places  troubled  with  the 
flirinking  of  the  Sinews  or  Arteries,give  much 
cafe;  Tie  juyee  of  the  Leavs,  or  rather  the 
Roots  thtmfelvs  given  to  drink  with  oldWine 
doth  wonlerfully  help  the  bitinp  of  any  Ser¬ 
pents  :  Aid  the  Root  beaten  with  a  little  Salt 
and  laid  oi  the  place,  fuddenly  eafeth  the  pain 
thereof,  aid  helpeth  thofe  that  are  bit  with  a 
mad-Dog.The  Juyee  of  the  Leavs  taken  with 
Honey  prevoketh  Urin,  and  remedieth  the 
pain  of  the  Bladder.  The  Seed  being  drunk  in 
Wine  fortydaies  together,  doth  wonderfully 
help  the  Soatica^  The  Leavs  bruifed  With 
the  White  a"  an  and  applied  to  any  place 
burnt  with  lire,  taketh  out  the  PirCjgivesfud- 
den  eafe,  am  heals  it  up  afterwards.  The  De- 
coftion  of  ttem  fomented  on  any  fretting  fore 
or  Canker  Ifcycth  the  corroding  quality,which 
muft  be  afterwards  anointed  with  an  Oint¬ 
ment  made  oi’the  fame  Liquor,  Hogs-Greaf, 
Nitre  and  "Vinegar,  boyled  together.  The 
Roots  may  bepreferved  with  Sugar,  and  taken 
fatting,  or  at  ether  times  for  the  faid  purpofes, 
and  for  Confunpticns,the  Ston,andtJ[ie  Lask. 
The  Seed  is  nuch  commended  to  break  the* 
Stone  and  cauft  it  to  be  expelled  by  Urinj  and 
is  often  ufed  with  other  Seeds  and  things  to 
that  purpofe. 

Venivs  challengeh  this  Herb  for  her  own, 
andbydts  Leaf  or  Seed  you  may  draw  the 
Womb  which  way  you  pleaf,  eitha'  upward  by 
applying  it  to  the  Crown  of  the  Heed,  if  in 
cafe  it  fal  out  j  or  downward  in  fits  of  the  Mo¬ 
ther,  by  applying  it  to  die  Seals  of  the  Pcet ; 
Or  if  you  would  ftay  it  in  its  place,  apply  it  to 
the  Navel,  and  that  is  one  good  way  to  ftay 
the  Child  in  it.  See  more  of  it  in  my  Guide 
fur  n'omn. 


Cabbages  Coleworts. 

IShal  fpare  a  labor  in  writing  a  Deferip- 
tion  of  thiefe,  ftth  almoft  every  one  that 
can  but  write  at  all  may  deferibe  them 
from  his  own  knowledg,  they  being  ge¬ 
nerally  fo  well  known  that  DeferiptionS 
are  altogether  needlefs. 

Tlace* 

Thefe  are  generally  planted  in  Gardens. 

Tim^ 

Their  flowering  time  is  towards  the  middle 
or  end  of  July,  and  the  Seed  is  ripe  in 

Vermes  and  Ufe'. 

The  Cabbages  or  Coleworts  boyled  gently 

in  Broth  and  eaten,  do  open  the  Body,  but  the 

fecond  Decoftion  doth  bind  the  Body.  The 
Juyee  therof  drunk  in  Wine  helpeth  thofe  that 
are  bitten  by  an  Adder,  and  the  Decoftion  of  - 

the  Flowers  bringeth  down  Womens  Courfes.  , 

Being  taken  with  Honey,  it  recovrerethhoarf- 
nett  or  lofs  of  the  voice.  The  often  eating  of 
them  wcl  bDyled,hdIpeth  thofe  that  ate  entriag 
into  a  Confumption.  The  Polpof  the  middle 
Ribs  of  Coleworts  boyled  in  Almond  Milk, 
and  made  up  into  an  Elcfhary  with  Honey, 
being  taken  often,  is  very  profitable  for  thofe 
that  are  purfie  and  Ihort-windcd.  Being  boyr 
Icd'twiccjandan  old  Cock  boyled  in  the  Broth  ObflruEti- 
and  drunk,  it  helpeth  the  pains  and  obftrudi-  ons, 
ons  of  the  Liver  and  Spleen,  and  the  Stone  in  Stone, 
the  Kidnies.  The  Juyee  b^cd  with  Honey  Sight, 
and  dropped  into  the  comer  of  the  Eye,  clea-  C anther 
reth  the  %ht,by  confuining  any  Film  or  cloud  Surfets, 
beginlng  to  dim  itiit  alfo  confumeth  the  Can^ 
ker  growing  thcrin.  They  are  much  commen¬ 
ded  being  eaten  before  meat,  to  keep  one  from 
furfetting ,  as  alfo  from  being  drunk  with  too 
much  Wine,  or  quickly  make  a  man  fober  a- 
gainthatis  drunk  before.  For  (as  they  fay  J 
there  is  fuch  an  Antipathy  or  enmity  between 
the  Vine  and  the  Colewort,  that  the  one  vyill 
die  where  the  other  groweth.  The  Deco^ion 
of  Coleworts  taketh  away  the  pain  and  ach, 
and  allaycththc  fwellings  of  fwoln  and  gouty 
Legs  and  Knees,  wherein  many  grofs  andwa-  ^  ^ 
try  humors  are  fallen,  the  place  being  bathed 
therwith  warm ;  It  helpeth  alfo  old  and  filthy 
fores  being  wafhed  therewith,  and  hcaleth  all  ■ 

final  Scabs,  Puftics  and  Wheals  that  breakout 
in  the  Skin.  The  Aflies  of  Colewort  Stalks 
mixed  with  old  Hogs-Greafe  are  very  effeftual 
\  to  artoint  the  Sides  of  thofe  that  have  had  long 
K  pains 


i6 


The  Englijh  Thyjitian. 


Melm- 

choUji 

wind’ 


pains  thcrin,  or  any  other  place  pained  w  ith 
Melancholly  and  windy  humors. 

This  was  Turcly  Chry'fipfits  his  godjandther- 
forehe  wrote  a  who!  Volumn  of  them  and 
their  Vertues,  and  that  none  of  the  leaft  nei¬ 
ther,  for  he  would  be  no  fmal  Fool,  he  apic- 
priates  them  to  every  part  of  the  Body,  and  to 
every  Difeaf  in  every  part,  and  honeft  old  Ca¬ 
to  they  fay  ufed  no  other  Phyfick,  I  know  not 
whar  Mettals  their  Bodies  were  made  of,  this 
lamfure.  Cabbages  are  extream  windy  whe¬ 
ther  you  take  them  as  Meat,  or  as  Medicine, 
yea  as  windy  Meat  as  can  be  eaten,  unlcfs  you 
cat  Bagpipes  or  Bellows,  and  they  are  >  but  fcl- 
dom  eaten  in  our  daies,  and  ColnvoYt  Flowers 
are  fcmthing  more  tollerable,  and  the  whol- 
fomer  Food  of  the  two. 

The  Moon  challengeththeDcminion  of  the 
Herb. 

The  SeaCoIewort. 


Defcription- 

'T’His  hathdiverf  fomwhatlong  and  broad, 
large  thick  wrinkled  Lcavs,fomwhat  crum¬ 
pled  upon  the  edges,  growing  each  upon  a  fe- 
veral  thick  Footualk  very  brittle,  of  a  grayifh 
green  colour.  From  among  which]  rifeth  up  a 
Srong  thick  ftalk  two  Foot  high  and  Better, 
with  feme  Leavs  theron  to  the  top,  where  it 
fcrancheth  fonh  much  j  and  on  every  Branch, 
iiandcth  a  large  Bufti  of  pale  whitiAi  Flowers, 
corfifting  of  four  Leavs  apiece;  The  Root 
5s  fomwhat  great  and  ftiootcth  forth  many 
Branches  under  f  ground ,  keeping  the  green 
Leavs  al  the  Winter. 

?lace. 

They  grow  in  many  places  upon  the  Sea 
Coafts,  as  j  wel  bn  the  Kcntiih,  as  Ejjex 
Shores,  as  at  Lidd  in  Esnty  Colechefter  in 
Ejjexy  and  diver f  other  places,  and  in  other 
Countries  of  this  Land. 

Time. 

They  Flower  and  Seed  about  the  time  that 
'other  kinds  do. 

Venues. 

The  Broth  or  firft  Decoftion  of  the  Sea 
Colewort  doth  by  the  fhaip  nitrous  and  bitter 
t^uadities  thcrin,  open  the  Belly  and  purge  the 
Body,  it  clenfieth  and  digefteth  more  power¬ 
fully  than  the  other  kind ;  The  Seed  herof 
bruifed  and  drunk,  killeth  Worms.  The 
Leavs  or  thejuyce  of  them  applied  to  Sores  or 
Ulcers  clenfeth  and  healeththem,  and  diflbl- 
veth  Swellings,  and  taketh  away  Inflamati 

nflama- 


Sores 3 
womdsy] 
ulcersy 


^  ^  *1  4  *1* 

Calamint,  or  Mountain 
Mint. 


Dcfcripticn. 

THis  is  a  fmal  Herb  feldom  riling  above  a 
a  Foot  high,  with  fquare  hoary  and  woo¬ 
dy  Stalks,  and  two  Imal  hoary  Leavs  fet  at  a 
Joynt,  about  the  bignefs  of  Marjoram,  or  not 
much  cigger,  a  little  dented  about  the  edges, 
and  of  a  very  fierce  or  quick  fcent,  as  the  wfiol 
Herb  is :  The  Flowers  ftand  at  feveral  Ipaces 
of  the  Stalks  from  the  middle  almoft  upw^ds, 
which  are  final  and  gaping  like  to  thofeMints, 
and  of  a  pale  Blulh  cblour  :  after  which  fol¬ 
low  final,  round,  blackilh  Seeds :  The  Root 
is  fmal  and  Woody,  with  diverf  firal  fprigS 
fpreading  within  the  ground,  and  dieth  not, 
but  abideth  many  ycers. 

Tlace. 

It  groweth  on  Heaths  ,  and  Upland  dry 
grounds,  in  many  places  of  this  Lana. 

Time. 

They  Flower  in  their  Seed  is  ripe 

quickly  after.  j 

Venues  and  vfe. 

The  Decofticn  of  the  Herb  bpg  drunk.  Terms 
bringeth  down  Womens  Courfes  and  provo-  provoJies, 
keth  Urin  :  It  is  profitable  for  thife  that  are  "Difury, 
Burfien,  or  troubled  with  Coivulfions  or  7{upturesy 
Cramps,  with  Ihortnefs  of  Breath  or  Cholle-  Convul-. 
rick  torments  and  pains  intheiv^lies  or  Sto-  Jions. 
machs,  it  alfo  helpeth  the  yelWw  Jaundice,  CrampSy 
and  llaieth  Vomiting,  being  takn  in  Wine  j  Shortnefi 
taken  with  Salt  and  Honey,  it  kilcth  al  man-  of  Breathy 
ner  of  Woims  in  the  Body ;  11  helpeth  fuch  Jaiindicty 
as  have  the  Leprofie,  either  tal^n  inwardly,  Vomitingy 
drinking  Whey  after  it,  or  tht  green  Herb  Wormsy^ 
outwardly  applied  ;  It  hindrejii  Conception  Leprofey 
in  Women  :  being  either  biuitd,  orftrewed  SerpentSy 
in  the  Chamber,  it  driveth  afvay  Venemou'S  Blac^  and 
Serpents.  It  takes  away  black  jnd  blue  marks  blue 
in  the  Face,  andmaketh  bla^  Scars  become  Mar^Sy 
wel  colored,  if  the  green  Heip  (not  the  dry)  Scarsy 
be  boylcd  in  Wine  and  laid  to  (he  place,  or  the  S ciatkay 
place  waftied  therwith.  Bein^  applied  to  the  ,  ObfiruCii- 
Hucklebone,  by  continuance  of  time  it  fpen-  on  of  the 
deth  the  humors  which  cau^d  the  pain  of  the  Liver  and 
Sciatica.  The  juyee  dropped  into  the  Ears  Spkin. 
killeth  the  Worms  in  thc/n  :  The  Leavs  boy- 
led  in  Wine  and  drunk  profokeih  fweat,  and 
openethObftrufticnsoftheLiverandSpleenj  . 
it  helpeth  them  that  hive  a  T ertian  Ague  (the 
Body  being  firft  purged)  by  taking  away  the 
cold  Fits.  ThePccodion  herof  with  fome. 

Sugar 


Gall-) 
Comb  3 
Bowels  y 
Spleen^ 


Stitches  in 
the  Side. 

Jgues. 


Liver, 
Spleen, 
wearinef , 

Sinews, 

Swellings, 


ChoUic\, 

Stone, 

Belly-ach, 

C  old,dch. 


Jaundice, 

Vropfie, 

Brain  3 


Crarno, 

Stitch  in 
the  Side. 


The  Englijh  Thyfitian^ 


Sugar  put  therto  afttrwariisj  is  very  profitable 
for  thofe  that  be  troubled  with  the  overflow¬ 
ing  of  the  Gal',  and  that  have  an  old  Cough, 
and  that  arc  fcarce  able  to  breath  by  the  (hort- 
nels  of  their  wind  :  That  have  any  cold  di- 
ftemper  in  their  Bowels,  and  are  troubled  with 
the  hardnefs  of  the  Spleen  ,  for  al  which  pur- 
pofes,  both  the  Ponder  called  T>iacdaminthes 
and  the  Compound  Syrup  of  Calamint(which 
are  to  be  had  at  the  Apothecaries)  are  ihoft 
cfFciflual. 

Let  nor  Women  be  too  bufy  with  it,  for  it 
Works  very  violently  upon  the  Poeminin  parts. 

^  ^  ^  ^  ^  *1?  ^  ^  ^  ^ 

Chamomel. 

THis  is  fo  wcl  known  every  where  that  k 

is  but  loll  time  and  labor  to  deferibe  it. 
The  Vertues  wherof  are  as  followeth. 

A  Decodion  made  of  Chamomel  and  drunk, 
taketh  away  al  pains  and  Stitches  in  the  Sides. 
The  Flowecs  of  Chamomel  beaten  and  made 
up  into  Bals  with  Oyl  driveth  away  al  forts  of 
Agues  j  if  the  party  grieved  be  anointed 
with  that  Oyl  taken  from  the  Flowers, 
from  the  Crown  of  the  Head  to  the  Soal  of 
the  Foot,  and  afterwards  laid  to  fweat  in  his 
Bed,  and  that  he  fweat  wel :  This  is  NicheJ- 
for  an  Bgyptian’s  Medicine.  It  is  profitable 
for  all  forts  of  Agues  that  come  either  from. 
Flegm  or  Melancholly,  or  from  an  Inflamati-. 
on  of  the  Bowels  being  applied  when  the  Hu¬ 
mors  caufing  them  fhal  be  conceded ;  and 
there  is  nothing  more  profitable. to  the  fides 
and  Region  of  the  Liver  and  Spleen  than  it. 
The  bathing  with  a  Deeodion  of  Chamomel 
taketh  away  wearinefs,  eafeth  pains  to  what 
part  of  the  Body  foever  they  be  applied  t  it 
comforteth  the  Sinews  that  ’are  overftrained, 
mollifieth  al  Swellings  :  It  moderately  com¬ 
forteth  al  parts  that  have  need  of  warmth,  di- 
gefteth  and  difiblveth  whatfoever  hath  need 
thcrof  by  a  wondcrfiil  fpeedy  property.  It 
eafeth  al  the  pains  of  the  CholUck  and  Stone, 
and  al  pains  and  torments  of  the  Belly,  and 
gently  provoketh  Urin.  The  Flowers  boyled 
in  Poflet  Drink  provoketh  Sweat,  and  helpcth 
to  expel  Colds,  Aches,  and  Pains,  wherfoever 
and  is  an  excellent  help  to  bring  down  Wo¬ 
mens  Courfes.  A  Syrup  made  of  the  juyee  of 
Chamomel  with  the  Flowers  and  white  Wine, 
is  a  Remedy  againfl  the  jaundice  and  Drop- 
fie.  The  Flowers  boyled  in  a  Ly,  are  good  to 
walh  the  Head,  and  comfoJt  both  it  and  the 
Brain.  The  Oyl  made  of  the  Flowers  of 
•  is  much  ufed  againfl  al  hard  fwel- 

liiigs,  pains  or  aches,  fhrinking  of  the  Sinews 
or  .Cramps,  or  pains  in  the  Joynts,  or  anyo- 
therpart  of  the  Bodyj  being  ufed  in  Cliflers, 
ir  helpeth  to  diflolve  wind  and  pains  in  the 


Bellyj  anointed  alfo  it  helpeth  Stitches  and 
painsin  the  Sides. 

"Ifichejor  faith  the  Egyptians "  dedicated  it 
to  the  Sun  becauf  it  cured  AguesJ  and  they 
were  like  enough  to  doit,  for  they  were  the 
arranteft  Apes  in  their  Religion  that  ever  I 
red  of.  Bacchinus,  Pena,  and  Label  commend 
the  Syrup  made  of  the  Juyee  of  it  and  Sugar, 
taken  inwardly,  to  be  excellent  for  the  Spleen. 
Alfo  this  is  certain,  that  it  mdft  wonderfully 
breaks  the  Stone,  fome  take  it  in  Syrup  oc, 
Decoftion,  others  injed  the  Jiiyce  of  it  into 
the  Bladder  with  a  Syring  j  my  Opinion  is. 
That  the  Salt  of  it  taken  half  a  dram  in  a 
morning,  in  a  little  White  or  Rheniih 
Wine  is  better  than  either,  that  it  is  excel¬ 
lent  for  the  Stone  appears  by  this,  which  I 
have  feen  tried,  vi-ii;.  That  a  Stone  that  hath 
been  taken  out  of  the  Body  of  a  man  being 
wrapped  in  Chamomel  will  in  time  diflblve, 
and  in  a  little  time  too. 

Campions  wild* 

Tpeferiptions, 

He  white  wild  Campion  hath  many  long 
and  fomwhat  broad  dark  green  Leavsy 
lying  upon  the  ground  with  diverf  Ribs  ther- 
in  fomwhat  like  Plantane,  but  fomwhat  hairy, 
broader,  and  not  fo  long:  The  hairy  Stalks 
rife  up  in  the  middle  of  them  three  or  four 
I  foot  high,  and  fomtimes  more,  with  diverf 
I  great  white  Joynts  at  feveral  places  theron,an(I 
two  fuch  like  Leavs  therat  up  to  the  top,  fen¬ 
ding  forth  Branches  at  the  feveral  Joynts  alfo  j 
al  which  bear  on  feveral  Footftalks  white  Flo¬ 
wers  at  the  tops  of  them,  confifting  of  five 
broad  pointed  Leavs,  every  one  cut  in  on  the 
end  unto  the  middle,  making  them  feem  to  be 
two  apiece,  fmelling  fomwhat  fweet,  and  each 
of  them  ftanding  in  large  green  ftriped  hairy 
Husks ,  large  and  round  below  next  to  the 
Stalk :  The  Seed  is  final  and  grayiih  in  the 
hard  Heads  that  come  up  afterwards:  The 
Root  is  white  and  long,  fpreading  diverf  fanes 
in  the  ground. 

The  Red  Wild  Campion  groweth  in  the 
fame  manner  as  the  White,  but  his  Leavs  arc 
not  fo  plainly  ribbed,  fomwhat  ihortcr,  roun¬ 
der  and  more  woolly  in  handling ;  The  Flo¬ 
wers  are  of  the  fame  form  and  bignefs ,  but  in 
fom  of  a  pale,  in  others  of  a  bright  red  colour, 
cut  in  at  ends  more  finely,  which  maketh  the 
Leavs  feem  more  in  number  than  the  other. 
The  Seed  and  the  Roots  are  alike  ;  The 
Roots  of  both  forts  abiding  many  years. 

Ther  are  forty  five  kinds  of  Campions  more, 
thofe  of  them  which  are  of  Phylical  ufes  ha¬ 
ving  the  like  Vertues  with  thefe  above  deferi- 
bed,  which  I  take  to  be  the  two  chififeft  kinds, 
k  a  ‘Place 


p/rfff. 

They  grow  commonly  through  this  Land 
by  Licldsj  Hcdg-hdes,  and  Ditches. 

Time- 

They  flower  in  Summer  fom  earlier  than  o- 
thersj  and  Tome  abiding  longer  than  others. 

■y  Venues  and  life- 

It  is  found  by  experience  that  the  Decoflion 
Bleeding  pi  the  Herb  either  the  White  or  Red  being 
inward  &  drunk,  doth  flay  inward  bleedings  5  and  ap- 
mtward)  plied  outwardly  it  doth  the  like  :  And  being 
’Difury,  drunk  helpeth  to  expel  the  Urin,  being  ftop’d. 
Gravel,  and  Gravel  or  the  Stone  in  the  Reins  or  Kid- 
ChoUer,  fties.  Two  drams  of  the  Seed  drimk  in  Wine, 
Venemous  PUrgeth  the  Body  of  Chollerick  humors,  and 
Beafts.  l^elpeth  thofe  that  are  flung  by  Scorpions,  or 
Tlagues,  Other  venomous  Beafts ,  and  may  be  as  effe- 
Sores,  £iual  for  the  Plague  :  It  is  of  very  good  ufein 
ulcers,  old  Sores,  Ulcers,  Cankers,  Fiflulaes  and  the 
C anl^ers,  like,  to  clenf  and  heal  them,  by^onfuming  the 
"Fiflulaes-  moift  humors  falling  into  them,  andcorredi- 
ing  the  putrifaftion  of  Humors  offending 
them.' 

Carrots. 

THe  Garden  kind  are  fo  wcl  known  that 
they  need,  no  Defaiption  >  but  becaufc 
*hey  ate  of  Ids  Phyfical  ufe  than  theWild  kind 
(as  indeed  almoft  in  all  Herbs  the  Wild  are 
moft  effedual  in  Phyfich,  as  being  more  pow¬ 
erful  fn  operation  then  the  Garden  kinds)  I 
lhal  therfore  briefly  defcribe  tht  Wild  Carrot- 
Defcr'iption- 

It  groweth  in  a  manner  altogether  like  the 
Tame,  but  that  the  Leavs  and  Stalks  arefom- 
what  whiter  and  rougher :  The  Stalks  bear 
lai^c  tufts  of  white  Flowers,  with  a  deep  Pur¬ 
ple  fpot  in  the  middle,  which  are  contraded 
together  when  the  Seed  begins  to  ripen,  that 
the  middle  part  being  hollow  and  low,  and  the 
outer  Stalks  rifmg  highjmaketh  the  whol  Um¬ 
bel  to  fliew  like  a  Birds-Neft.  The  Root  is 
fmall,  long,  and  hard,  unfit  for  meat,  being 
fomwhat  fharp  and  flrons. 

Place- 

ThcWild  kind  groweth  in  diverf  parts  of 
this  Land  plentifully  by  the  Fields  fidesjand  in 
tintiJled  places. 

Tim. 

They  flower  and  feed  in  theendofSum- 
taer. 

The  Vertues- 

Wind,  The  Wild  kind,  breaketh  Wind,  andrerao- 

S titches,  veth  Sthchts  in  the  Sides,provoketh  Urin  and 
proyolies  Womens  Courfes,  and  helpeth  to  break  and 
Wtin  and  expel  the  Stone  :  The  Seed  alfo  of  the  fame  i 
theTermS}  worketh  the  like  effed,  and  is  good  for  the 
StonC)  Dropfie,  and  thofc  whole  Bellies  are  fwollen 
with  Wind  j  helpeth  the  Chollickj  the  Stone 


in  the  Kidnies,  and  the  rifing  of  the  Mother,  P'<’opJie, 
being  taken  in  Wine,  orboylcdin  Wine  3.ni^i'oUick, 
taken  j  and  helpeth  Conception.  The  Leavs  Barrennefl 
being  applied  with  Honey  to  running  Sores  or  tilcers- 
Ulcers,  doth  clenfe  them. 

I  fuppofe  the  Seeds  of  them  perform  this 
better  than  the  Roots  j  And  though  Galeft 
commend  Garden  Carrots  highly,  to  break 
Winds  yet  experience  teachethjihat  they  breed 
it  firft  i  and  we  may  thank  Nature  for  expel- 
ling  it,  not  they  :  The  Seeds  of  them  expel 
Wind  indeed,  and  fo  mend  what  the  Root 
marreth. 


Caraway. 


Defeription. 

IT  beareth  diverf  Stalks  of  fine  cut  Leavs  ly¬ 
ing  upon  the  ground  fomwhat  like  to  the 
Leavs  of  Carrots,  but  not  bufhing  fo  thick,  of 
a  little  quick  taft  in  them,  from  among  which 
rifeth  up  a  fquare  Stalk  not  fo  high  as  the  Car¬ 
rot,  at  whole  Joynts  are  fet  the  like  Leavs  but 
final er  and  finer,  and  at  the  top*fmal  open  tufts  ' 

or  Umbels  of  white  Flowers,  which  turn  into 
final  blackifh  Seed  fmaler  than  the  Armijeed, 
and  of  a  quicker  and  hotter  taft.  The  Root  is 
whitifh,  final  and  long,  fomwhat  like  unto  a 
Parfnep,  but  with  more  wrinckled  Bark,  and 
much  lefs,  of  a  little  hot  and  quick  taft,  and 
ftronger  than  the  Parfnep,  and  abideth  after 
Seed-time. 

Place. 

It  is  ufually  fown  with  us  in  Gardens. 

Tme- 

They  flower  Injune  or /«/y,and  feed  quick¬ 
ly  after. 

Vertues  and  ufe- 

Co'raway  Seed  hath  a  moderat  fharp  quality 
wherby  it  breakethWindandprovoketh  Urin,  u 
which  alfo  the  Herb  doth.  The  Root  is  better  Difury, 
food  than  the  Parfnep,  and  ispleafant  &  com-  jndigtftia, 
fortable  to  the  Stomach,  helping  digeftion.  Head, 
The  SeedFs  conducing  to  all  the  cold  griefs  of  Stomach, 
Head  and  Stomach,  the  Bowels  or  Mother,  as  BoWels, : 
alfo  the  wind  in  them,  and  helpeth  to  fliarpen  Mother 
the  Eye-fight.  The  Pouder  of  the  Seed  pxA  Blacl(  and 
into  a  Pultis,  taketh  away  black  and  blue  fpots  blue  jpots, 
of  Blows  or  Brnifes.  The  Herb  it  felf,or  with  Bruijes, 
fome  of  the  Seed  bruifed  and  fryed,  laid  hot  in  ChoU'ttk- 
a  bag  or  double  cloth  to  the  lower  part  of  the 
Belly,  eafeth  the  pains  of  the  wind  Chollick. 

The  Roots  of  Caraways  eaten  as  men  eat 
Parfnips,  ftrengthen  the  Stomacks  of  ancient 
people  exceedingly,  and  they  nied  not  make  a 
whol  meal  of  them  neither,  and  are  fit  to  be 
planted  in  every  ones  Garden. 

Caraway  Comfefts,  once  only  dipped  in 
Sugar,  and  half  a  fpoonful  of  them  eaten  in 
the  morning  fafting,  and  as  many  after  each 
.  Meal 


^9 


The  Engltfi)  ^hyjitian. 


meal  is  a  moft  admirable  Remedy  for  fuch  as 
are  troubled  with  Wind. 

Celandine. 

Defmftion-  -  - 

THis  hath  divcrf tender,  round,  whitilh, 
green  Stalks, yvnh  greater  Joyntsthan  or¬ 
dinary  in  other  Hirbs,  as  it  were  Knees,  very 
brittle  and  eafie  to  break,  from  whence  grow 
Branches  with  large  tender  long  Leavs,  much 
divided  into  many  parts,  each  of  them  cut  m 
on  the  edges,  fet  at  the  Joynts  on  both  lidcs 
of  the  Branches,  of  a  dark  bluilb  green  colour 
on  the  upper  fide  like  Columbines,  and  oi  a 
more  pale  bluilh  green  underneath,  ful  of  a 
yellow  fap,  when  any  part  is  broken,  of  a  bit¬ 
ter  tail  and  ffrong  feent.  At_  the  tops  of  the 
Branches  which  are  much  divided,  grow  gold 
yellow  Flowers  of  four  Leaves  apiece  ,  after 
which  come  fmal  long  pods,with  blackiih  feed 
therin.  fhe  Root  is  fomwhat  great  at  the 
head,  {hooting  forth  divcrf  other  long  Roots 
and  final  Strings,  reddifh  on  the  outfidc  and 
ydlow  within,  ful  of  a  yellow  fap  therein. 

'  Tlace. 

It  groweth  in.many  places  by  old  Walls,  by 
the  Hedges,  an4  way  fides  in  untillcd  places  j 
and  being  once  planted  in  a  Garden,efpecially 
in  feme  feady  .plaice,  it  wil  remain  there. 

.  Time. 

They  flower  all  the  Summer  long,  and  the 
Seed  ripeneth  in  the  mean  time. 

Vertties  and  u  fe. 

The  Herb  or  Roots  boyled  in  white-Wihe 
Oblli'u^i-  and  drunk,  a  few  Anifeeds  being  boyled  ther- 
ons  of  ffcewith,openeth  ObRruftions  of  the  Liver  and 
Liver  andC^  hclpeth  the  yellow  Jaundice :  and  the 
GaU ,  ye/^often  ufing  it,  helps  the  Dropfie,  and  the  Itch, 
low  J aurf-g^^  thofethat  have  old  Sores  in  their  Legs,  or 
«{ice,Dyo^^other  parts  of  the  Body.  The  juyee  thereof 
fie,  Pe/?j-"  taken  falling, is  held  to  be  of  Angular  good  ufc 
a’gainft  the  Peftilence  :  The  diftilled  Water, 
withalittle  Sugar,  and  a  little  good  Triacle 
mixed  therwith  (the  party  upon  the  taking  be- 
ii^  laid  down  to  fweat  a  little)  hath  the  fame 
e&d.  The  Juyee  dropped  into  the  Eyes  clen- 
feth  them  from  Films  and  cloudinefs  which 
darken  the  fight  ,  but  it  is  bell  to  allay  the 
fharpnes  of  thejuyee  with  a  little  Breaft-milk: 
It  is  good  in  old  fflthy  corroding  creepingUl- 
cers  wherfocver,to  flay  their  malignity  of  fret¬ 
ting  and  running,  and  to  caufe  them  to  heal 
the  more  fpeedily :  The  Juyee  often  applied  to 
Tetters,  Ringworms,,  or  other  fuch  like  fprea- 
ding  Cancers,  will  c^uickly  heal  them ,  and 
laibbed  often  upon  Warts  will  take  them  away. 
The  Herb  with  the  Roots  bruifed  and  heated 
with  Oyl  of  Camomel,and  applied  to  the  N a- 


lence. 


Lyes. 


ulcers. 


Tetters, 

'Ring¬ 

worms, 

Casiccrs 

warts, 


Belly -Bo-  vel,taketh  away  the  griping  pain  in  the  Belly 


and  Bowels,  arid  all  the  pains  of  the  Mother ;  we  Is, 
and  applied  to  Womens  Brealls  llayeth  the  o-  therWorms 
vermuch  flowing  of  their  Courfes.  The  Juyee  Terms 
Decoftion  of  the  Herb  gargled  between  the  flops. 
Teeth  that  ake,  ,'eafeth  the  pain  j  and  ths.  Toothache 
Pouder  of  the  dryed  Root,  laid  upon  an  aching  ltch,Beati* 
hollow,  or  loof  Tooth,  wil  caul  it  to  fal  out.  ty  loft. 
Thejuyee  mixed  with  fom  Pouder  of  Brim- 
Hone,  is  not  only  good  againft  the  Itch,  but 
taketh  away  al  difcolourings  of  the  Skin  what- 
foever :  And  if  it  chance  that  in  a  tender  Bo¬ 
dy  it  caufeth  any  Itching  or  Inflamation,  by 
bathing  the  place  with  a  little  Vinegar  it  is 
helped. 

This  is  anHerb  of  the  S««i,&under  the  Coe- 
lellial  Lyon, ini  is  one  of  the  bell  cures  for  the 
Eyes  that  is.  Al  that  know  any  thing  in  A-, 
ftrologie,  know  as  wcl  as  I  can  tel  them.  That 
the  Eyes  are  fubjeft  to  the  Luminaries  j  let  it 
then  be  gathered  when  the  Sun  is  in  Leg,  and 
the  Moon  in  Aries  applying  to  his  Trine  ',  let 
Leo  arife,  then  may  you  make  it  into  an  Oyl 
or  Oyntment  which  you  pleale  to  anoint  your 
fore  Eyes  withil :  I  caii  prove  it  both  by  my 
own  experience,  and  the  experience  of  thole 
to  whom  I  have  taught  it.  That  moll  defperat 
fore  Ey®  have  been  cured  by  thh  only  Medi- 
cinejAndthen  I  pray,is  not  this  farbetter  than 
endangering  the  Eyes  by  the  art  of  theNecdle? 
fbr  lfthis  do  not  abfolutly  take  away  the  Film,’ 
it  will  fo  facilitate  the  work  that  it  may  be  don 
without  danger. 

Another  il-favored  trick  have  Phyfitians  got 
to  ufe  to  the  Eye,  and  that  is  worfe  than  the 
Needle;  which  is,  Toeat  awaythe  Filriil  by 
corroding  or  gnawing  Medicines.  This  I  ab¬ 
folutly  protell  againft. 

1  Becaufe  the  T unicles  of  the  Eye  are  very 
thin,  and  therfore  foon  eaten  afunder. 

2  The  Callus  or  Film  that  they  would  cat 
away  is  feldom  of  an  equal  thicknefs  in  every 
place,  and  then  the  T  unicle  may  be  eaten  a- 
funder  in  one  place,  before  the  Film  be  confu- 
med  in  another,  and  fo  be  a  readier  way  to  ex- 
tinguilh  the  fight  than  to  reftore  it. 

It  is  called  Chelidonium  from  the  Greek 
word  which  fignifies  a  Swallow,  be¬ 

caufe  they  fay.  That  if  you  prick  out  the  Eyes 
of  yong  Swilows  when  they  are  in  the  Nell, 
the  old  ones  wil  recover  their  Eyes  again  with 
this  Herb.  This  I  am  confident,  for  I  have 
tried  it.  That  if  you  mar  the  very  Apple  of 
their  Eyes  with  a  Necdle,lhe  wil  recover  them 
attain,  but  whether  with  this  Herb  or  no  I 
know  not. 

Alfd  I  have  read  ’(  and  it  feems  to  me  fom- 
Whatprobable)  That  the  Herb  being  gathered 
asllliewed  before,  and  the  Elements  drawn 
apart  from  it  by  the  art  of  the  Alchymift^  and  , 
after  they  are  drawn  apart,r edified,  the  earthy  ' 
quality  Hill  in  redifying  them,  added  to  the 
Terra  damnata  (as  Alchymifts  call  it)  or  Ter¬ 
ra  facratilfima  (  as  fom  Phylofophers  call  it  ) 

L  tlie 


Ihe  Engl'tfl)  ^hyjftmi. 


\ 


the  Elements  fo  rcftified  are  fufficient  for  the 
Cureofal  Difeafes,  the  hiunov  offending  bc- 
'  ingknovm  and  the  Contrary  Element  given'^ 
'  It  is  an  Experience  wurth  the  trying,  and  can 
y  .  tiono  harm* , 

The  lefler  Celondine^ 

it faaUy  \norvn  by  the  N am  of 

Pilewort. 

1  Wonder  what  ailed  the  Antients  to  give 
this  the  name  of  Celandine  which  refcmblcs 
at  neither  in  Nature  nor  form*!  It  acquired 
the  Name  ofTi/fwarf  from  its  Vermes,  and 
at  being  no  great  matter  where  I  fet  it  down, 
fo  I  do  fet  it  down  at  al,I  humor’d  Dr.  Tradi¬ 
tion  fo  much  as  to  fet  it  down  here. 

Vefeription- 

This  Celandine  then  or  Tilewort  (which 
you  pleafc)dorh  fpread  many  round,pale,grecn 
Leavs  fet  on  weak  and  trailingBrancheSjwhich 
lie  upon  the  ground,  and  are  fat,  fmooth,  and 
femwhat  fliining,  and  in  fome  places  though 
feldom)  marked  with  black  fpots,  caA  lan¬ 
ding  on  a  long  Footftalk  among  which  rife 
Cnw  yellow  Flowers,  confifting  of  nine  or  ten 
fmal  narrow  Leavs,  upon  flendcr  Footftalks 
very  like  unto  a  Crowfoot,  wherunto  the  Seed 
alfo  is  nnt  unlike,  being  many  fmal  ones  fet 
together  upon  a  Head.  The  Root  is  made  of 
many  final  Kernels  like  grain  of  Corn,  fome 
twice  as  long  as  others,  of  a  whitifh  colour 
with  fome  Fibres  at  the  end  of  them. 

Tlace. 

It  grow,eth  for  (the  moft  part  in  the  moift 
corners  of  Fields,  and  places  that  are  neer  wa¬ 
ter  Sides,  yet  wil  abide  in  dryer  grounds,  if 
they  be  but  a  little  lhadowed. 

Time. 

It  Flowreth  betimes  about  March  or  Aprlli 
is  quite  gone  in  Mayy  fo  as  it  cannot  be 
found  until  it  fpring  again. 

Vertues  and  ufe. 

It  is  certain  by  good  experience  that  the 
Dccoftion  of  the  Leavs  and  Roots,doth  won- 
Hemor-  derfully  help  the  Piles  and  Hemorrhoids,  as 
rhoidsy  alfo  Kernels  by  the  Ears  and  Throat  called 
Kh'tgsS-  the  Kings  evil  5  or  any  other  hard  Wens  or 
vil.  Tumors. 

Here’s  another  Secret  for  my  Country  Men 
and  Women,  a  couple  of  them  together.  Pile- 
wart  being  made  into  an  Oyl  Oyntment  or 
Plaifter,  readily  cures  both  the  Piles  or  He¬ 
morrhoids,  and  the  Kings  Evil,  If  I  may 
,  Lawfully  cal  it  the  Kings  Evil  now  there  is 
no  King,  the  very  Herb  bom  about  ones  Bo¬ 
dy  next  the  Skin,  helps  in  fuch  Difeafes, 
though  it  never  touch  the  place  grieved,  let 
good  people  make  much  of  it  fcr  thefe  ufes, 


with  this  I  cured  my  own  Daughter  of  the 
Kings  Evil,  broke  the  Sore,  drew  out  a  quar¬ 
ter  of  a  pint  of  Corruption,  and  cured  it 
without  any  Scar  at  all,  and  in  one  Weeks 
time. 

The  Ordinary  fmall 
Centaury 

'  Vefcription. 

'^His  groweth  up  moft  ufually  but  with  one 
round  and  fomwhat  crefted  ftalk,  about 
a  foot  high,  or  better,  branching  forth  at  the 
top  into  many  fprigs,  and  fome  alfo  from  the 
Joynts  of  the  Stalks  below  j  The  Flowers 
that  ftand  at  the  tops  as  it  were  in  an  umbel  or 
tuft,  are  of  a  pale  red,  tending  to  a  Carnation 
colour,  confifting  of  five,  fomtimes  fix  fmall 
Leavs,  very  like  thofe  of  St.  Johns  Wort,  o- 
pening  thcmfelvs  in  the  day  rime,  and  clofing 
at  night  j  after  which  come  Seed  in  little  fhort 
Husks  in  form  like  unto  Wheat  Corns :  The 
Leavs  are  fmal  and  fomwhat  round.  The 
Root  fmal  and  hard,  pcriftiing  every  year  : 

The  whol  Plant  is  of  an  exceeding  bitter 
taft. 

There  is  another  fort  in  al  things  like  the 
former,  favc  only  it  bearcth  white  Flowers. 

Place, 

They  grow  ordinarily  in  Fields,  Paft'urcs, 
and  Woods,  but  that  with  the  white  Flowers, 
not  fo  frequent  as  the  other. 

■Time. 

They  Flower  in /«/y,  or  there  abouts,  and 
Seed  within  a  Month  after. 

Vertues  and  Ufe. 

This  Herb  boyled  and  drunk,  purgeth 
Chollerick  and  grofs  humors,  and  hclpeth  the  CboUer, 
Sciatica:  It  openeth  Obftruflions  oi  the  Sciatic  a. 
Liver,  Gall,  aud  Spleen,  helping  the  Jaun-  ObftruEli- 
dice,  and  eafing  pains  in  the  Sides,  and  hard-  onsy  Tver 3 
nefs  of  the  Spleen,  ufed  outwardly,  and  is  gi-  Gall, 
ven  with  very  good  cfFed  in  Agues:  hhd-SpUeny 
peth  thofe  that  have  the  Dropfie  or  the  green  Aguesy 
Sicknefs,  being  much  ufed  by  the  Italians  in  Dropfie, 
pouder  for  that  purpofe.  It  killeth  the  Worms  g^reen  fic^- 
in  the  Belly  as  is  found  by  experience.  The  nefi,  Chol- 
Decoftion  therof  (vi'xj)  the  tops  of  the  Stalks  licbyTerms 
with  the  Leavs  and  Flowers,  is  good  againft  provol^esy 
the  Chollick,  and  to  bring  down  Womens  Joynts, 
Courfes,  helpeth  to  avoid  the  dead  birth,  and  Gout,  Sci- 
eafeth  pains  of  the  Mother,  and  is  very  effe-  atica, 
dual  in  al  old  pains  of  thejoynts,  as  theGout, 

Cramps,  or  Convulfions.  A  dram  of  the 
Pouder  therof  taken  in  Wine,  is  a  wonderful  ^  ^  /r 
good  help  againft  the  biting  and  poyfon  of 
the  Adfc.  The  juyee  o?  the  Herb  with 
a  little  Honey  put  to  it,  is  good  to  deer  the  ^  a 
Eyes  from  dimnefs,  mifts,  and  clouds  that  of-  ' 

fend 


/ 


The  EngUp?T^hyfitmi. 


Eyes, 

woums, 

ulcers. 


'Ears,  , 
Scabby 
Heads, 
Erecl(Jes, 
Spots, 


fend  or  hinder  the  Sight:  It  is  fmgular  good' 
both  for  green  and  frefh  Wounds,  as  alfo  for 
old  Ulcers  and  Sores,  to  clofe  up  the  one  and 
clenf  the  other,  and  pcrfedly  to  cure  them 
both,  although  they  be  hollow  or  Fiftulousj 
the  green  Herb  efpecially  being  bruifed  and 
laid  therto.  The  Decodtion  therof  dropped 
into  the  Earsjclcnfeth  them  from  WormSjclen- 
feth  the  foul  Ulcers  and  ipreading  Scabs  of  the 
Head,  and  taketh  avhy  al  Freckles,  Spots,  and 
Marks  in  the  Skin  being  waflied  therwith. 

The  H^rb  is  fo  fafe  you  cannot  fail  in  the 
ufing  of  it,  only  give  inwardly  for  inward 
Difeafes,ufe  it  outwardly  for  outwardDifeafes, 
’Tis  very  wholfom  but  not  very  toothfom. 

Dr.  T^eafon  and  Dr.  Experience  could  not  a- 
gree  (the  Jaft  time  I  fpake  with  them)  whe¬ 
ther  the  Herb  were  under  the  Dominion  of 
the  Sun  or  >Mars. 

The  Cherry-Tree. 


I 


'  Si^ppofe  there  are  few  but  know  this  T ree, 
^  for  his  Fruits  fake,  and  therfore  Aral  fpare 
cbe  writing  a  Defeription  therof. 

Place. 

'  For  the  place  of  its  growth,  it  is  afforded 
room  in  evety  Orchard. 

Verrtues  and  vfe. 

Cherries,  as  they  are  of  different  tails,  fo 
they  arc  of  diverf  qualities  :  The  fweet  pafs 
through  the  Stomach  and  Belly  more  fpeedily, 
but  are  of  little  Nouriihment.  The  tart  of 
,  fowr,  are  more  pleafing  to  an  hot  Stomach, 

illFlem  procuring  appetite  to  meat,  and  help  to  cut 
/?  H  .^ough  Flegm  and  grols  humors  j  but  when 
C  T  dryed  they  are  more  binding  thebel- 

mors,  001,  when  they  are  freih,  being  cooling  in 
^oyoye  Difeafes,  and  welcom  to  the  Stomach,  and 
provoke  Urin.  The  Gum  of  the  Cherry '•Tree 
’  p  diflolved  in  Wihe,  is  good  for  a  cold  Cough, 
oivrjneji,  hoarfnefs  of  the  Throat,  mendeth  the  co- 

^ .  lour  in  the  Face,  fharpneth  the  E y e-fight ,pro- 

>  voketh  appetite, and  helpeth  to  break  and  expel 
the  Stone.  The  Black  Cherries  bruifed  with 
the  %onesanddiftillcdi  the  Water  therof  is 
much  ufed,  to  break  the  Stone,  expel  gravel, 
and  break  the  Wind. 

Winter  Cherries. 

Defeription. 

'He  winter  Cherry  hath  a  running  or  cree¬ 
ping  Root  in  the  ground  of  the  bignefs 
many  times'  of  ones  little  Finger,  fhooting 
forth  at  feveral  Joynts  in  feveral  places,  wher- 
by  it  quickly  fpreadeth  a  great  compafs  of 
gronnd ;  The  Stalk  rifeth  not  above  a  yard 


wind. 


high,  wheron  arc  fet  many  broad,  and  long 
green  Lcavs,  fomwhat  like  Nightfliade  biit 
larger,  at  the  Joynts  wherof  come  forth  whi- 
tifh  Flowers  made  of  five  Leavs  apiece,  which 
after  turn  into  green  Berries,  inclofed  with 
thin  Skins,  which  change  to  be  reddifh,  when 
tiiey  grow  ripe,  the  Berry  likewife  being  red¬ 
difh,  and  as  large  as  a  Cherry,  wherin  are  con¬ 
tained  many  flat  and  yellowifh  Seeds  lying 
within  the  pulp  }  which  being  gathered  and 
ftrung  up  are  kept  all  the  ycer  to  be  ufed  upon 
occafion. 

Place. 

They  grow  not  naturally  in  this  Land,  but 

are  cherifhed  in  Gardens  for  their  Vertucs. 

Time. 

They  Flower  not  until  the  middle  or  latter 
end  of  July,  and  the  Fruit  is  ripe  about  the 
end  of  .yiuguft,  or  beginning  of  September. 

Vertues  and  ufe. 

They  arc  of  great  ufe  in  Phyfick  :  The 
Leavs  being  cooling  may  be  ufed  in  Inflama-  Inflamau- 
tions,  but  not  opening,  as  the  Berries  and  ons,Di[u~ 
Fruit  arc,  which  by  drawing  down  the  Urine  ry ,  Stone, 
provoke  it  to  be  avoided  plentifully  when  it  is  Gravel, 
flopped  or  grown  hot,  fliarp,  and  painful  in  ulcers  in- 
the  paflage  5  it  is  good  alfo  to  expel  the  Stone  the  ‘E^eins 
and  Gravel  out  of  the  Reins,  Kidnies,  and  and  Blad- 
Bladder,  helping  to  diffolvc  the  Stone,  and  a-  derjp'iffi/ig 
voiding  it  by  greet  or  gravel  fent  forth  in  the  Blood, 
Urinjit  alfo  helpeth  much  to  clenf  inward  Im-  jharpnef^ ; 
poftumes  or  Ulcers  in  the  Reins  or  Bladder,or  of  Unns. 
in  thofe  that  avoid  a  Bloody  or  foul  Urin.The 
diftilledWatC).- of  the  Fruit,  or  the  Lcavs  to^ 
gethcr  with  them ,  or  the  Berries  green  or 
dry,  diftilled  with  a  little  Milk,  and  drunk 
morning  and  evening  with  a  little  Sugar,  is 
effedualto  al  the  puipofes  afore  fpecified,  and 
efpecially  againft  the  heat  and  fharpnefs  of  the 
Urin.  I  fhS  only  mention  one  way  amongft 
many  others  which  might  be  ufed  for  ordering 
the  Berries  to  be  helpful  for  the  Urin  and  the 
Stone,  which  is  thus.  Take  three  or  four  good 
handfuls  of  the  Berries  either  green  and  frefh, 
or  dried  and  having  bruifed  them,  put  them 
into  fo  many  Gallons  of  Beer  or  Ale  when  it 
is  new  tunned  up  :  This  Drink  taken  daily 
hath  been  found  to  do  much  good  to  many, 
both  to  eafthc  pains  and  expel  Urin,  and  the 
.  Stone  i  and  to  caufthe  Stone  not  to  ingender. 

The  Deepdion  of  the  Berries  inWine  orWa- 
ter  is  the  moll  ufual  wa/  j  but  the  Pouder  of 
them  taken  indrinkis  more  effedual. 

Chervil. 

Defeription. 

THe  Garden  Chervil  doth  at  firfl  fomwhat 
refemble  Parfly,  but  after  it  is  better 
grown  the  Lea«  arc  much  cut  in  and  jagged 
L  a  refembiing 


A  precious 
Receipt* 


Stomach 

Clotted, 

Bloody 

BrdfeSy 

Msy 

Difury, 

Stoney 

Tleureficy 

Sidesy 

SwellingSy 

blacl(  and 

blue  Spots. 


refembling  Hemlocks,  being  a  little  hairy  and 
of  a  whitifh  green  colour,  lomtimes  turning 
reddifh  in  the  Summer  with  the  Stalks  alfo  s 
It  rifeth  little  above  half  a  Foot  high,  bearing 
white  Flowers  in  fpoked  tufts,  which  turn  in¬ 
to  long  and  round  Seed  pointed  at  the  ends, 
and  blackifti  when  they  are  ripe  j  of  a  fweet 
tail,  but  no  fmel,  though  the  Herb  it  felf  fmel- 
leth  reafonable  wel ;  The  Root  is  fmal  and 
long  and  periftieth  every  yeer,  and  muft  be  fo- 
wen  anew  in  the  Spring  for  Seed,  and  after 
July  for  Autumn  Sallet. 

The  wild  Chervil  groweth  two  or  three  foot 
high,  with  yellow  Stalks  and  Joynts,  fet  with 
broad®-  and  more  hairy  Leavs,  divided  into 
fundry  parts  nicked  about  the  edges,  and  of  a 
darker  green  colour,  which  likewife  grow  red¬ 
difh  with  the  Stalks ;  at  the  tops  wherof  Hand 
fmal  white  tufts  of  Flowers  &  afterwards  fma- 
ler  and  longer  feed  :  The  Root  is  whitCjhard, 
and  enduring  long.  This  hath  little  or  mo 
feent. 

VUce. 

The  firft  is  fown  in  Gardens,  for  a  Sallet- 
Herb.  The  fecond  groweth  wild  in  many  of 
the  Meadows  of  this  Land,  and  by  the  Hedg- 
fldes,  and  on  Heaths. 

Time. 

They  flower  and  feed  early,  and  thereupon 
are  fown  again  in  the  end  of  Summer. 

Venues  and  ufe. 

The  Garden  Chervil  being  eaten,doth  mo¬ 
derately  warm  the  Stomach,  and  is  a  certain 
remedy  (  faith  Tragus)  to  diflblve  congealed 
or  clotted  Bloud  in  the  Body,  or  that  which  is 
clotted  by  bruifes,  fals,  &c.  The  juyee  or  di- 
ftilled  Water  therof  being  drunk,and  the  brui- 
fed  Leavs  laid  to  the  place,  being  taken  either 
in  meat  or  drink,  it  is  held  good  to  provoke 
Urin,  to  expel  the  Stone  in  the  Kidnies,  to 
fend  down  Womens  Courfes,  and  to  help  the 
Plurifie  and  prickings  of  the  Sides. 

The  wild  Chervil  bruifed  and  applied,  dif- 
folveth  Swellings  in  any  part  of  the  Body,  and 
taketh  away  the  Spots  and  Marks  of  congealed 
Blood  by  Bruifes  or  Blows,  in  a  little  fpace. 

Sweet  Chervil  j 

OR 

Sweet  Cicely. 

Defeription. 

■'His  groweth  very  like  the -greater  Hemlock 
having  large  fpread  LeavSjCut  into  diverfe 
parts,  but  of  a  frefher  green  colour  than  the 
tailing  as  fweet  as  the  Annifeed.Thc 
Stalk  rifeth  up  a  yard  high  or  better  being  cre- 
fted  or  hollow,  having  the  like  Leavs  at  the 
Joynfsjbut  lelTer  j  and  at  the  tops  of  the  bran¬ 


ched  Stalks, Umbels  orTufts  of  whiteFlowei-s; 
after  which  com  large  and  long  crefled,  black 
fhining  Seed,  pointed  at  both  ends,  tailing 
quick,  yet  fwaet  and  pleafant.  The  Root  is 
great  and  white,  growing  deep  in  the  ground, 
and  fpreading  fundry  long  Branches  therein, 
in  tall  and  fmel  llronger  than  the  Leavs  or 
Seed,  and  continuing  many  years. 

Place. 

This  groweth  in  Gardens. 

Venues. 

This  whol  Plant  belides  its  pleafantnefs  in  Cold  Sto- 
Sallets,  hath  alfo  his  Phyfical  Vertucs.  The  fnacb 
Root  boyled  and  eaten  with  Oyl  and  Vinegar,  mnd^ 

(or  without  Oyl)  doth  much  pleaf  and  warm  Fleg^ 
an  old  and  cold  Stomach,  opprelTed  with  wind  LiinaiLr 
or  flegm,  or  thofe  that  have  the  Phtifick  otph^nQU 
Confumption  of  the  Lungs.  The  fame  drunk  Pellih„r„ 
with  Wine,  is  a  prefervative  from  the  Plague  j  Tclm^o/n- 
itprovoketh  Womens  Courfes,  andexpflleth 
the  After-birth,  procureth  anappetit  to  meat,  tpilhL 
and  expelleth  Wind.  The  Juyee  is  good  to  Aooetitp 
heal  the  Ulcers  of  the  Head  and  Face.  The  .. 

candied  Roots  .hereof  are  held  as  effcdlual  as 
Angelicaxo  preferv  from  Infeftion  in  the  time 
of  a  Plague,  and  t©  warm  and  comfort  a  cold 
weak  Stomach.  .  ' 

It  is  fo  harmlcfs  you  cannot  uTc  it  amifs.  ’-  ■[ 

Chickweed. 

\ 

'  » 
Defeription. 

THis  is  generally  known  to  moll  People, 

I  lhal  therfore  not  trouble  you  with  the 
Defeription  therof ;  nor  my  lelf  with  fetting 
founh  the  feveral  kinds  j  fith  but  only  two  or 
three  arc  conlidcrable  for  their  ufefulnefs. 

Place. 

Thefe  are  ufually  found  in  moill  and  watry 
places,by  W  ood  fides,  ''and  elf- where. 

Time. 

They  flower  about and  their  Seed  is 
vipt  in  July. 

Venues  and  ufe. 

It  is  found  to  be  as  elFcdual  as  Purflane  to  al 
the  purpofes  whereumo  it  ferveth,  except  for 
meat  only.  The  Herb  bruifed  or  the  Juyee  ap¬ 
plied  (with  deaths  or  fpunges  dipped  therein) , 
to  the  Region  of  the  Liver,  and  as  they  dry  to  HotLivery 
have  frelh  applied,  doth  wonderfully  ^temper  Apeftumsy 
the  heat  of  the  Liver  5  and  is  effedual  for  all  Srvellimsy 
Impollhums  and  Swellings  wherefoetcr  j  for  Red  Fmc, 
all  rednefs  in  the  Face,  Wheals,  Puflies,  Itch,  wheals y 
Scabs,  the  Juyee  either  limply  ufed,  or  hoyltd  Pu(hesy 
with  Hogs-Greaf  and  applied }  the  fame  hd-  ItchyScabs 
peth  Cramps,  Convulllons  and  Pallies :  The  Cramp, 
Juyee  or  dillilled  Water  is  of  much  good  ufe  Convulft- 
for  al  heat  and  rednefs  in  the  Eyes  to  drop  fom  on,  Palfey, 
therof  into  them  5  as  alfo  into  the  Ears  to  eafe  T{ed  Eyes, 
pains  in  them ,  and  is  of  good  effeft  to  cafe 

the 


/ 


Hcmor- 

rhoidst 

ulursj 


Sinews^ 


Difury, 

Seed  en- 

creaf. 

Stone, 

eofiivnef, 

Term! 

p  Of 


The  EngUJh  T’hyfitian. 


thepains,  the  heatj  and  fharpnefs  of  Blood  in 
the  Piles  and-oene rally  al  pains  in  the  Body 
that  arife  of  heat  i  it  is  ufed  alfo  inliot  and  vi¬ 
rulent  Ulcers  and  fores  in  the  privy  parts  of 
Man  or  Womans  or  on  the  Legs  or  elf-whcre. 
The  Leavs  boyled  with  Marih*  Mallows  and 
made  into  a  Pultis  with  Fenugreek,  and  Lin- 
feed,  applied  to  Swellings  or  Impollhumes  ri- 
peneth'  and  breaketh  them ,  or  fwageth  the 
'fwcllings  and  eafeth  the  pains :  It  helpeththe 
Sinews  when  they  are  fhrunk  by  Cramps  or  o- 
therwife,  and  to  extend  and  make  them  pliable 
again,  by  this  Medicine.  Boyl  an  handful  of 
Chicl^yeeed  and  a  handful  of  Red-Rofe  Leavs 
dryed,  but  not  diftilled  in  a  Quart  of  Mufea- 
dine  until  a  fourth  part  be  confumed  j  then 
_put  to  them  a  pint  of  the  Oyl  of  Trotters,  or 
Sheeps-feet  j  let  them  boyl  a  good  while  ftill 
flirting  them  V.  .1  i  which  being  flrained,  a- 
noint  the  grieved  place  herewith,w^rm  againft 
a  fire,  rubbing  it  wel  in  with  ones  hand,  and 
bind  alfo Tome  of  the  Herb  (if  you  wil)  to  the 
place,  and  with  Gods  bleifing  it  will  help  in 
three  times  drefling. 

Cich-Peaf,  or  Cicers. 

Vufcnption, 

THe  Garden  forts,  whether  Red,Blackj  or 
White,  brings  forth  Stalks  a  yard  long, 
wheron  do  grow  many  fmal  and  almoft 
round  Leavs,  dented  about  the  edges,  fet  on 
both  fides  of  a  middle  Rib  :  at  the  Joynts 
come  forth  one  or  two  Flowers  upon  Ihort 
Footllalks,  Peaf  faflrion,  either  white  or  whi- 
tifh,  or  purpiifh  red,  lighter  or  deeper  accor¬ 
ding  as  the  Peaf  that  fwlow  will  be,  that  are 
contained  in  fmal,  thick,  and  fhort  Pods, 
wherin  lie  one  or  two  Peaf  more  ufually,  a  lit¬ 
tle  pointed  at  the  lower  end,  and  almoft  round 
at  the  Head,  yet  a  little  corner’d  or  fharp. 
The  Root  is  fmal,  and  perifheth  yeerly. 

Tlace  and  Time>. 

They  are  fown  in  Gardens,  or  the  Fields, 
as  Peaf,  being  fown  later  than  Peaf,  and  ga¬ 
thered  at  the  fame  time  with  them,  or  prefent- 
ly  after. 

VertUes  md  ufe. 

They  are  no  lefs  windy  than  Beans,but  nou. 
rifh  morcjthey  provoke  Urine, and  are  thought 
to  encreaf  Sperm, they  have  a  clcnfing  faculty, 
wherby  they  break  the  Stones  in  the  Kidneys. 
To  drink  the  cream  of  them  being  boyled  in 
Water  is  the  beft  way  5  it  moveth  the  Belly 
downwards,  provoketh  Womens  Courfes,  and 
Urin,  and  cncrcafeth  both  Milk  and  Seed. 
One  ounce  cf  Cicers,  two  ounces  of  French 
Barley,  and  a  fmal  handful  of  Marfh-Mallow 
Roots,  clean  waflrcd  and  cut,  being  boyled  in 
ills  broth  of  a  Chicken,  and  four  ounces  taken 


Pain  in 
the  fides. 


Ob^ruSii- 
on, Stone, 
Open, 
geli,Dif-  ' 
felvci 


in  the  morning  and  falling  two  hours  after  is 
a  good  Medicine  for  a  pain  in  the  Sides.  The 
white  Cicers  arc  ufed  more  for  Meat  than  Me¬ 
dicine,  yet  have  they  the  fame  effefts,  and  arc 
thought  more  powerful  to  encreaf  Milk  and 
Seed. 

The  wild  Cicers  are  fo  much  more  powerful 
than  tlie  Garden  kinds,^by  how  much  they  ex¬ 
ceed  them  in  heat  and  drinefs ;  whereby  they 
do  more  open  Obftruftions,  break  the  Stone, 
and  have  al  the  properties  of  cutting, opening, 
digefting,  and  difTolving,  and  this  more  fpee- 
dily,  and  certainly  than  the  former. 

( 

Cinkfoyl,  or  Five  Leaved 
Grafs  j 

•  Called  in  jorne  Countries, 

Five  finger'd  Grafs. 


Defeription. 

THis  fpreadetn  and  creepeth  far  upon  the 
ground,  with  long  {lender  ftwngs  Ukd 
Strawberries ,  which  take  Root  again 
and  fhooteth  forth  many  Leavs  made  of 
parts,  and  fomtimes  of  feven,  dented  about  the 
edges  and  fomwhat  hard  j  The  Stalks  aie 
fl^er  leaning  downwards,  and  bear  many 
fmd  yellow  Flowers  theron,'  with  fome  yellow 
threds  in  the  middle,  Handing  about  a  fmooth 
green  heads  which  when  it  is  ripe  is  a  little 
rough,  and  containeth  fmal  brownifh  Seeds. 

The  Root  is  of  a  blackifh  brown  colour,  fel- 
dom  fo  big,  as  ones  little  finger,  but  growing 
long  with  fome  threds  therat  5  and  by  the  fma 
firings  it  quickly  fpreadeth  over  the  ground. 

"Place, 

Itgrowcthby  Wood  fides,  Hedgfides,  the 
Pathwaies  in  Fields,  and  in  the  Borders  and 
Corners  of  them  almoft  through  all  this 
Land. 

Time. 

It  Flowreth  in  Summer,  fome  fooncr,  fome 
later.  Inflamati- 

Vermes  and  ufe.  '  on,  F ex¬ 

it  is  an  efpecial  Herb  ufed  in  all  Inflamati-r  vers.  Pe¬ 
ons  and  Leavers  whether  Infedlious  or  Pefii-  (tilence, 
lentiali  or  among  other  Herbs  to  cool,  snd  Sore 
temper  the  Blopd  and  humors  in  the  Body  5  Mouths, 
As  dfo  for  all  Lotions,  Gargles,  Injeftions,  ulcers, 
and  the  like  for  fore  Mouths,  Ulcers,Cankers,  Canl{ers, 
Fiftulaes,  and  other  corrupt.  Foul,  or  running  Fiftulaes, 
Sores.  The  juyee  herof  drunk  aboiy:  font  ^dney, 
ounces  at  a  time  for  certain  daies  together, 
cureth  the  Quinfie,  and  the  yellow  Jaundice,  Jaundice, 
and  taken  for  thirty  daies  together  cuxeth  the  Falling 
Falling-ficknefs,  The  Roots  boyled  in  Milk  fclinef, 
and  drunk  is  a  moft  effedlual  remedy,  for  all  Flux, 
Fluxes  in  Man  or  Woman,  whether  tht  Terms 
M  Whites  flops. 


34 


The  Englijh  Thyjitian. 


whites,  Whites,  or  Reds,  as  alfo  the  Bloody  Flux. 
Bloody  '  The  Roots  boyled  in  Vinegar,  and  the  Deco- 
Ilux,  dion  therof  held  in  the  Mouth,  eafcth  the 
Tooth-ach,  pains  of  the  Toothach.  The  Juyce  or  Deco- 
Hoarfnefl,  ^fion  taken  with  a  little  Honey,  helpeth  the 
Cowh  ,  hoarfnefs  of  the  Throat,  and  is  good  for  the 
Pal/ey  of  Cough  of  the  Lungs.  Thediftillcd  Water  of 
iheHands,  Roots  and  Lcavs  is  alfo  effeftual  to  all 
Pyiots  in  purpofes  aforefaid :  and  if  the  Hands  be 

the  Flelh,  o^^^n  waftied  therin,  and  fuffered  at  every  time 
St.^ntho~  without  wiping,  it  wil  in 

nies  Fire,  ^o^t  time  help  the  Palfy  or  making  in  them. 

The  Root  bovled  in  Vinegar,  helpeth  all 
Knots,  Kernels,  hard  fwellinp,  and  lumps 
growing  in  any  part  of  the  Flelh,  being  thcr- 
to  applied  5  as  alfo  al  Inflamatiohs,  and  St. 
Anthonies  Fire,  all  Impofthumes,  and  pain¬ 
ful  Sores,  with  heat  and  putrefaftion  J  the 
fhingles  alfo,  and  all  other  forts  of  running, 

’  and  feul  Scabs,  Sores,  an4  Itch.  The  fame 


Shingles, 
Scabs, 
Itch, 
Joynts 
pained. 
Sciatica, 
T{uptuns 
Gouts, 


Bruifes,  boyled  in  Wincjand  applied  to  anyjoynts 
^  full  of  pain  and  ach,  or  the  Gout  in  the  Hands 

BleedlnZ'  Hip-gout,  called  the  Sciatica, 

^  and  the  Decodion  therof  drunk  the  while, 
doth  cure  them ,  and  eafeth  much  pains  in  the 
Bowels.  The  Roots  are  likewife  effedfual  to 
help  Ruptures  or  Burftings,  being  ufed  with 
other  things  available  to  that  purpofe,  taken 
either  inwardly’or  outwardly,  or  both  5  as  al- 
^  fo  for  Bruifes,  or  Hurts  by  Hows,  Falls,  or 
the  like,  and  to  ftay  the  bleeding  of  Wounds 
in  any  part  inward  or  outward.  S 

This  is  an  Herb  of  Jupiter,  and  therfore 
ftre^thens  the  parts  of  the  Body  that  he  rules, 
let  Jupiter  be  angular  and  ftrong  when  it  is 
gathered,  and  if  you  give  but  a  fcruple  (which 
is  but  twenty  grains  of  it)  at  a  time,  either  in 
white  Wine,  or  white  Wine  Vinegar,  you 
Ihal  very  feldommifsthe  cure  ofan  Ague  be 
Afue  J.  Ague  foevcr  in  three  Fits,  as  I  have 

often  proved  to  the  admiration  both  of  my 
felf  and  others,  let  no  Man  defpife  it  becaufit 
is  plain  and  eafic,  the  “"waies  of  God  are  all 
fuch,  ’tisthe  imgodlinefs  and  impudency  of 
Man  that  made  things  hard,  and  hath  (by  fo 
doing)  made  fport  for  al  the  Devils  in  Hell, 
and  grieved  the  good  Angels,  and  when  you 
readethis,  your  own  Genius,  if  you  be  any 
thing  at  al  acquainted  with  it,  may  diftatc  to 
you  many  as  good  Conclufions  both  of  this 
and  other  Herbs. 

Some  hold  that  one  L  caf  cures  a  Quotidian, 
three  a  Tertian,  and  four  a  Quartan  Ague, 
and  a  hundred  to  one  if  it  be  not  'Diofeorides, 
for  he  is  ful  of  fuch  Whimfeys.  The  truth  is, 
I  never  flood  fo  much  upon  the  number  of  the 
Leavs,  nor  whether,!  gave  it  in  Pouder  or 
Decoftion:  \i  Jupiter  vi ext  ftrong  and  the 
Moon  applying  to  him  or  his  good  afpeft  at 
the  gathering  of  it,  I  never  kpew  it  mifs  the 
defired  efFcds. 


Clary. 

Defeription. 

OUr  ordinary  Garden  Cilery  hath  four 
fquare  Stalks,  with  broad,rough,wrink- 
led,  whitilh,  or  hairy  green  Leavs,  fomwhaf 
evenly  cut  in  on  the  edges,  and  of  a  ftrong, 
fweet  fent,  growing  fome  neer  the  ground,and 
fome  by  couples  upon  the  Stalks  ;  The  Flo¬ 
wers  grow  at  certain  diftanccs  with  two  fmd 
Leavs  at  the  Joynts  under  them,  fomwhat  like 
unto  the  Flowers  of  Sage,  but  fmaller,  and  of 
a  whitifh  blue  colour ;  The  Seed  is  brownifh,  . 
and  fomwhat  Flat,  or  not  fo  round  as  the 
wild,  the  Roots  are  blackifh  and  fpread  not 
far,  and  perifti  after  the  Seed  time  :  It  is  ufir- 
ally  forVn,  for  it  fcldom  rifeth  of  its  own  fow- 
ing. 

Place. 

This  groweth  in  Gardens. 

Time. 

It  Flowreth  in  June  and  July,  fome  a  little 
later  than  others,  and  their  Seed  is  ripe  in 
Auguft,  or  therabouts. 

Venues  and  ufe. 

The  Seed  is  ufed  to  be  put  into  the  Eyes  to 
deer  them  from  Moats ,  or  other  fuch  like 
things  gotten  within  the  Lids  to  offend  them, 
as  alfo  to  clear  them  from  white  or  red  Ipots  in. 
them.  The  Muccilage  of  the  Seed  made  with  ■ 

Water,  and  applied  to  Tumors  and  fwellings, 
dilperfeth  and  taketh  them  away,  as  alfo  dra- 
weth  forth  Splinters,  Thorns,  or  other  things  ^hnterSi 
gotten  into  theFlefh.The  Lcavs  ufed  with  Vi-  ‘thorns, 
negar  either  by  it  felf  or  with  a  little  Honey,  , 
doth  help,  hot  luflamations,  as  alfo  Boyls,  Fe- 
Ions,  and  the  hot  Inflamations  that  are  gathc- 
red  by  their  pains,  if  it  be  applied  before  they 
be  grown  too  great.  The  Pouder  of  the  dri-  j 
ed  Leavs  put  into  the  Nofe  provoketh  neefing, 
and  therby  purgeth  the  Head  and  Brain 
much  Rhewm  and  Corruption.  The  Seed  or 
Leavs  taken  in  Wine  provoketh  to  V entry. 

It  is  of  much  ufe  both  for  Men  and  Women 
that  have  weak  Eacks,to  help  to  ftrengthen  the  ^ 
Reins,  ufed  either  by  it  felf  or  with  other 
Herbs  conducing  to  the  fame  effefl,  and 
Tanfies  often :  The  frefti  Leavs  dipped  in  a 
Batter  of  Flower,  Egs,  and  a  little  Milk,  and 
fried  in  Butter,  and  ferved  to  the  T able,  is  not 
unpleafant  to  any,  but  exceeding  profitable 
for  thofe  that  are  troubled  with  weak  Backs, 
and  the  effefts  therof.  The  Juyce  of  the 
Herb  put  into  Ale  or  Beer,  and  drunk,  brin- 
gethdown  Womeiw  Courfes,  and  ^expclleth 
ihe  After-birth. 


It 


The  EiigUJh  T’hyfitian. 


35 


It  is  an  ufual  courf  with  Men  when  they  | 
have  gotten  the  running  of  the  Reins,  or  Wo-  i 
men  the  Whites,thcn  run  to  the  buih  of  Clfftys 
Maid  bring  hither  the  Frying  Pan,  fetch  me  | 
fomc  Butter  quickly,  then  to  eating  ftyed  Clu-  j 
ry,juft  as  Hogs  eat  Acorns, and  this  they  think  ; 
wil  cure  their  Difeal  (forfooth)  wheras  when  | 
they  have  devoured  as  much  as  wil  grow 
upon  an  Acre  of  ground,  their  Backs  as 
much  the  better  as  though  they  had  pifled  in 
their  fhoos,  nay  perhaps  much  worf. 

As  for  that  trick  of  curing  the  Eyes  by  it,  I 
can  as  yet  fay  nothing  to  it,  for  the  reft  it  may 
be  eftc^ual. 

We  will  grant  that  Clary  ftrengthens  the 
Back,  but  this  we  deny.  That  thccauf  of  the 
running  of  the  Reins  in  Men,  or  the  Whites 
in  Women  lies  in  the  Back  (though  the  Back 
may  fomtimes  be  weakned  by  them)  and  ther- 
fore  the  Medicine  is  as  proper,  as  for  me  when 
my  Toe  is  fore,  to  lay  a  Plaifter  to  jny  Nofe. 

Cleavers,  or  Goofgrafs. 

Vefcrlptim- 

'T’He  common  cleavers  hatit  diverf  very 
^  rough  fquare  Stalks,  not  fo  big  as  the  T ag 
of  a  Point,  but  rifmgup  to  be  two  or  three 
yards  high  fomtimes,  if  it  meet  with  any  tall 
Bufhes  or  Trees  wheron  it  may  climb  (yet 
without  any  Clafpers)  or  elf  much  lower  and 
lying  upon  the  Ground  full  of  Joynts,  and  at 
every  of  them  Ihooteth  forth  a  Branch,  befidcs 
the  Leavs  thcrat,  which  are  ufually  fix,  fet  in 
a  round  compafs  like  a  Star,  or  the  Rowel  of 
a  Spur;  from  between  the  Leavs  at  the  Joynts 
towards  the  tops  of  the  Branches,  come  forth 
very  final  white  Flowers,  every  one  upon  a 
fmsd  threddy  Footftalk,  which  after  they  arc 
fallen,  there  do  ftiew  two  final,  round,  rough 
Seeds,  joyned  together  like  two  Tefticles, 
which  when  they  are  ripe  grow  hard  and  whi- 
tilh,  having  a  little  hole  on  the  fide  fomwhat 
like  unro  aNavil.  Both  Stalks,  l  eavs,  and 
Seeds  are  fo  rough  that  they  wil  cleav  to  any 
thing  fhal  touch  them.  The  Root  is  fmall 
and  very  threddy,  fpraading  much  in  the 
Ground,  but  dieth  every  yeer. 

Place. 

It  groweth  by  the  Hedg,  and  Ditch  Sides 
in  many  places  of  this  Land,  and  is  fo  trou- 
blefom  an  Inhabitant  in  Gardens,  that  it 
rainpeth  upon  and  is  ready  to  choak  what  ever 
grows  next  it. 

Time. 

It  Flowreth  in  June  and  July,  and  the  Seed 
is  ript  and  fallcth  again  in  the  end  of  July  or 
ftom  whence  it  Ipringcth  up  again, 
and  not  from  the  old  Roots. 


Vertues  and.  ufe. 

The  juyee  of  the  Herb,  and  Seed  together  Venemom 
taken  in  Wine,  helpeththofe  that  are  bitten  Beafis, 
with  an  Adder,  by  preferving  the  Heart  from 
the  Venom  ;  It  is  familiarly  taken  in  Broth  Pamtfly 
to  keep  them  lean  and  lank  that  are  apt  to  Tellow 
grow  fat.  The  diftilled  Water  drunk  twice  a  Jaundice, 
day  helpeth  the  yellow  Jaundice,  and  the  De-  FliiX,Bloo- 
coftion  of  the  Herb  in  experience  found  to  do  dy  flux, 
the  fame,  and  ftaycth  Lasks  and  Bloody  Flux-  m  omds, 
cs.  The  Juyee  of  the  Leavs,  or  they  a  WttXtTJlcers, 
bruifep  and  applied  to  any  bleeding  wound.  Swellings, 
ftayeth  the  Bleeding.  The  Juyee  is  alfo  very  Kings  £- 
goodtoclofeupthe  Lips  of  green  Wounds  3  viliPain 
and  the  Pouder  of  the  dried  Herb  ftrewed  in  the 
I  therupon  doth  the  fame,  and  likewife  helpeth  Ears. 
old  Ulcers  •  Being  boyled  with  Hogs  GreaO 
it  healeth  al  forts  of  hard  Swellings  or  Kernels 
in  the  Throat,  being  anointed  therwith.  The 
Juyee  dropped  into  the  Ears  taketh  away  the 
pains  of  them. 

It  is  a  good  remedy  in  the  Spring,  eaten 
(being  fitft  chopped  final  and  boyled  well)  in 
Water-gruel,  to  clenf  the  Blood,  and  ftreng- 
then  the  Liver,  thereby  keeping  the  Body  in 
health,  and  fitting  it  for  that  change  of  Seafon 
that  is  coming. 

Clowns  Woundwort. 

-  ( 

Defeription. 

IT  groweth  up  fomtimes  td  three  or  four 
Foot  high,  but  ufually  about  two  Foot,with 
.  fquare,  green,  rough  Stalks,  but  {lender,  joyn- 
I  ted  fomwhat  far  munder,  and  two  very  long, 

I  and  fomwhat  narrow ,  dark  green  Leavs, 

■  bluntly  dented  about  the  edges  thereat  ending 
;  in  a  long  point,  The  Flowers  ftand  toward 
the  tops  compafling  the  Stalks  at  the  Joynts 
with  the  Leavs  and  end  likewife  in  a  (piked 
■  top  ,  having  long  and  much  open  gaping 
I  hoods  of  a  Purplilh  red  colour,  with  whitilh 
'  fpots  in  them ,  ftanding  in  fomwhat  rough 
Husks,wherin  afterwards  ftand  biackifh  round 
Seeds.  The  Root  is  compofed  of  many  long 
ftrings,  with  fomc  tuberous  long  Knobs  gro¬ 
wing  among  them,  of  a  pale  yellowifti  or  whi- 
tilh  colour ,  yet  at  fomc  times  of  the  year 
thefe  knobby  Roots  in  many  places  are  not 
feen  in  the  Plant :  The  whol  Plant  fmclletb 
fomwhat  ftrongly. 

Plaee. 

It  groweth  in  fundry  Counties  of  this  Land 
both  7{orth  and  tvefi,  and  frequently  by  Path 
fidesin  the  Fields  ncer  about  London,  and 
within  three  or  four  miles  diftance  about  it, 
i  yet  it  ufually  grows  in  or  ncer  Ditches, 
j  Time. 

I  It  Flowreth  in  June  and  Jaly,  and  the  Seed 
j  is  ripe  foon  after.  ' 

M  2  yeriUfs 


) 

The  EngUJh  ThjJttfak) 


Wounds,  Venues  and  ufe. 

ulcers,  I  is  fii^ularly  cffedual  in  all  frefh  and  green 

Blood,  Wounds,  and  therfore  beareth  not  this  name 
Cancers,  for  nought.  And  is  very  available  in  ftan- 
Bloody  ching  ot  Blood,  and  to  dry  up  the  Fluxes  of 
Flux,Vef~  Humors  in  old  fretting  Ulcers,  Cancers,  &c. 
fels  bro\e7i  hinder  the  healing  of  them. 

Ruptures,  A  Syrup  made  of  the  juyee  of  it  is  inferior 
Spitting,  to  none  for  inward  Wounds,  Ruptures  of 
piffing,and  Veins,  Bloody  Flux,  Veflels  broken,  fpitting. 
Vomiting  piffing  or  vomiting  Blood,  ‘Ruptures  are  ex- 
Bloodj  cellenuy  and  Ipceduy,  even  to  admiration  cu- 
Veins  red  by  taking  now  and  then  a  little  of  rhe  Sy- 

fwelled,  tup,  and  applying  an  Oyntment  or  Plaifter 

Mufcles  of  the  Herb  to  the  place.  Alfo  if  any  Vein  be 

(ut,  fwelled,  or  Mufcle  cut,  apply  a  Plaifter  of  this 

Herb  to  it,  and  if  you  ad  a  little  Comfry  to 
it  ’twil  not  do  amifs,  I  alTure  the  Herb  de- 
fervs  Commendations  though  it  have  gotten 
but  a  Clownifh  name, and  whoever  readcs  this 
(if  he  try  it  as  I  have  done)'  will  commend  it 
as  well  as  I. 

1  have  done,  only  take  notice,  that  it  is  of 
a  dry  Earthy  quality,  and  under  the  Domini¬ 
on  of  the  Planet  Saturn- 

Cocks-Head. 


4* 'I?  ^  ^  ^  ^  4'’ ^  ^ 'y*  ^  ^  •I' 

^  Golumbines, 

THefe  are  fo  wel  known,  growing  in  al- 
moft  every  Garden,  that  I  think  I  may 
fave  the  expence  of  time  in  writing  a  Deferip-r 
tion  of  them.  *  ; 

Time. 

They  Flower  in  May,  and  abide  not  for  the 
moft  part  when  June  is  paft,  perfeding  their 
Seed  in  the  mean  time. 

Venues  and  ufe. 

The  Lcavs  of  Columbines  are  commonly  ti- 
fed  in  Lotions  with  good  fuccefs  for  fore 
Mouths  and  Throats  :  Tragus  faith.  That  a  Sore 
dram  ef  the  Seed  taken  in  Wine  with  a  little  Mouths  & 
Saffron,  openeth  Obftruftions  of  the  Liver,  Throats, 
and  is  good  for  the  yellow  Jaundice,  if  the  ObftheMi- 
party  after  the  taking  therof  be  laid  to  fweat  ons, yellow 
wel  in  his  Bed  :  The  Seed  alio  taken  in  Wine  Jaundice, 
caufeth  a  fpeedy  Delivery  of  Women  in  womens 
Childbirth  ■,  if  one  draught  fufft(;e  nor,,  let  Travail, 
her  drink  a  fccond,  and  it  is  fcffeiftual:  The 
Spaniards  ufe  to  eat  a  piece  of  the  Root  hereof 
in  a  morning  falling,  niany'daies  together,  to 
help  them  being  troubled  with  theStone  in  the 
Reins  or  Kidneys.  '  Stone. 


Defeription. 

TIJis  hath  diverf  weak,  but  rough  Stalks, 
half  a  yard  long,  leaning  dbwnwards, 
befet  with  winged  Lcavs,  longer  and 
more  pointed  than  thofe  of  Lentils,  and  whi- 
tilh  underneath  j  from  the  tops  of  thefc  Stalks 
arife  up  other  flender  Stalks,  naked  without 
Leavs  unto  the  tops,  where  there  grow  many 
fmal  Flowers  in  manner  of  a  Spike,  of  a  pale 
reddilh  colour,  with  fome  bluenefs  among 
them  ;  after  which  rife  up  in  their  places, 
roundj  rpugh,'  and  fdmwhat  flat  Heads.  The 
Root  is  tough  and  fomwhat  woody,  yet  livefh 
and  Ihopteth  anew  every  yeer* 

.  .  Place.  ■ 

It  growetft  under  Hedges,  and  fomtimes  id 
the  open  Fields,  in  diverf  places  of  rhis 
Land. 

-  ,  ,  Time. 

They  Flower  all  the  Months  of  July  and 
Auguft,  and  the  Seed  ripencth  in  the  mean 
while. 

Vertues  andufe. 

i<«ntt  W  hath  a  power  to  rarific  and  digeft,  and 
Kp  -ijfl/r  therfore  tjiie  green  Leavs  bruifed  and  laid  as  a 
v/flh  flflperfeth  KnotSi  Nodes,  or  Kernels 

Flelli,  and  if  when  it  is  dry  it  be  taken 
MilhSn^  in  Wine,-  it  hclpcth  the  Strangury  :  and  be- 
^  ing  anointed  witJi  Oyl,  it  provoketh  Sweat, 
It  is  a  lingular  Food  for  Cartel,  to  cauf  them 
to  give  ft^re  of  Milk,  and  why  then  may  it  not 
do  the  like  being  boyled  in  the  ordinary  drink 
of  Nur/es. 


Cattel. 


Coltsfoot^  or  Foalsfoot. 

Defeription. 

'T^His  Ihooteth  up  a  flender  Stalk  with  fmall 

'*•  ycllowilh  Flowers  fomwhat  early^  which 
fall  away  quickly,  and  after  they  are  paft,come 
up  fomwhat  round  Leavs,  fomtimes  dented  a  ' 
little  about  the  edges,  much  lefl'cr,  thicker 
and  greener  than  thole  of  Butterbur,  with  a 
little  down  or  Freez  over  the  green  Leaf  on 
the  upper  fide,  which  may  be  rubbed  away,and 
whitilh  or  mealy  underneath,  The  Root  is 
fmal  and  white  fpreading  much  under  ground, 
fo  that  where  it  taketh,  it  whil  hardly  Le  dri¬ 
ven  away  again,  ifany  little  piece  be  abiding 
therin  j  and  from  thence  Ipringeth  frelh 
Leavs.  .  '  , 

Place. 

It  groweth  as  well  in  -wet  groundsjas  in  drier 
place's. 

Time. 

And  Flowreth  in  the  end  of  Fcbru.'iry,  the 
Leavs  beginning  to  appear  in  Moi'ch. 

Vertues  andufe. 

The  frellt  Leavs,  or  Juyee,  or  a  Syrup  made 
therof  is  good  for  a  hot  dry  Cough,  for  whee-  Cough, 
lings  and  Ihortnefs  of  breath.  ThedryJLeavs  Jrbecftng, 
arc  bell  for  thofe  that  have  thin  Rhewms,  and  jhortnef 
Diftillations  upon  the  Lungs,  cauflng  a  of  breath. 

Cough, 


The  Tnglijh  ^hyfitian. 


V 


Amsy- 
Jnflama- 
tlonSi 
Swelling, 
St.  Antho¬ 
nies  fire. 
Burnings, 
ChoUericli 
Tufijes, 
Piles,  In- 
filarmtions 
in  the  Pri~ 
’vities. 


Coughj  for  which  alfo  the  dried  Leavs  taken 
as  Tobacco,  or  the  Root,  is  very  good.  The 
diftilled  water  herof  limply, or  with  EldeiTlo- 
wers  and  N ightlliade,  is  a  lingular  remedy  a- 
gainll  al  hot  Agues,  to  drink  two  ounces  at  a 
time,  and  apply  Cloathes  wet  therein  to  the 
Head  and  Stomach  i  which  alfo  doth  much 
good  being  applied  to  any  hot  Swellings  or 
Inflamations,  it  helpeth  St.  Anthonies  Fire, 
and  Burnings,  and  isfingulargoodtotake  a- 
way  Wheals,  and  fmal  Pulh'es  that  arife 
through  heat ;  As  alfo  the  burning  heat  of  the 
Piles,  or  privy  parts,  cloathes  wet  .therin  be¬ 
ing  therunto  applied.  _ 


Comfry. 


Ti 

■ 


,  .Vefeription. 

He  common  great  Comfry  hath  diverfvery 
large  and  hairy  green  Leavs  lying  on  the 
ground,  fo  hairy  or  prickly  that  if  they  touch 
any  tender  part  of  the  Hands,  Face,  or  Body, 
it  willcaufitto  itch:  The  Stalk  that  rifeth 
up  from  among  them  being  two  or  three  Foot 
high,  hollow  arid  cornered,  is  very  hairy  alio, 
having  many  fuch  like  Leavs  as  grow  Iselow, 
but  lelfer  and  leffer  up  to  the  top.  At  the 
Joynts  of  the  Stalks,  it  is  divided  intp^  many 
branches  with  fome  Leavs  theron,  and  at  the 
ends  ftand  many  Flowers  in  order  one  above 
another,  which  are  fomwhat  Iq^g  and  hollow 
like  the  finger  of  a  Glove,  of,  a  pale  whitilh 
colour,  ciftcr  which  come  fmal  black  Seed. 
The  Roots  are  great  and  long,  fpreading 
great  thick  Branches  under  ground,  black  on 
the  outfide  and  whitilh  within,  Ihort  or  eafie 
to  break,  and  ful  of  a  glutinous  or  clammy 
juyee  of  little  or  no  tail  at  al. 

There  is  another  fort  in  al  things  like  this, 
fave  only  it  is  fomwhat  lefs,  and  beareth  Flo¬ 
wers  of  a  pale  purple  colour. 

Place. 

They  grow  by  Ditches  and  Water  Sides, 
and  in  di verf  Fields  that  are  mpift,  for  therin 
they  chiefly  delight  to  grow  :  The  firft  gene- 
'  rally  through  al  the  Land,  fcd  the  other*  but 
in  fome  feveral  places. 

By  the  leave  of  my  Author,  the  firft  grow 
often  in  dry  places. 

Time. 

They  Flower  in  June  and  July,  and  give 
their  Seed  in  Auguft. 

Vertues  and  ufe.  . 

The  great  Comfry  helpeth  thofe  that  fpit 
Spitting,  blood,  or  make  a  Bloody  Urin  ;  The  Root 
pijfing  boyled  in  Water  or  Wine  and  the  Decodion 
Blood,  In-  drunk,  helpeth  al  inward  Hurts,  Bruifes  and 
ward  Wounds,  and  the  Ulcers  of  the  Lungs,  cau- 
Wounds  &  fing  the  Flegm  that  oppreffeth  them  to  be  ea- 
Bruifes,  lily  fpit  forth J  It  ftaieih  the  defluxions  of 


Rhewraftom  the  Head  upon  the  Lungs,  the 

Fhixes  of  Blood  or  humors  by  the  Belly,  Wo- 

mens  imntoderate  Coiufes,  as  well  the  Reds, 

as  the  Whites  5  and  the  running  of  the  Reins 

hapning  by  what  cauf  foever.  A  Syrup  made 

therof  is  very  effectual  for  all  thofe  inward 

Griefs  and  Hurts  j  and  the  diftilled  Water  for 

the  fame  purpofe  alfo,and  for  outward  Wounds 

and  Sores  in  the  Flefhy,  or  Sinewy  part  of  the 

Body  wherfoever  5  as  alfo  to  take  away  the  fits  lharp 

of  Agues,  and  to  allay  the  fharpnefs  of  Hu-  Idumors, 


mors.  A  Decodtion  of  the  Leavs  herof  is  a- 


woundsy 


vailable  to  all  the  purpofes,though'not  fo  efFe- 
dual  as  of  the  Roots.  The  Roots  being  out-^''"^^» 
vvardly  applied,helpeth  frefli  Wounds  or  Cuts 
immediatly,  being  bruiled  and  laid  therunto  j 
and  is  efpecial  good  for  Ruptures  and  broken 
Bones  :  yea  it  is  faid  to  be  fo  powerful  to  con- 
folidate  and  Knit  together  3  that  if  they  be 
boyled  with  diffevered  pieces  of  Flefli  in  a  pot 
it  will  joyn  them  together  again.  It  *  is’  good 
to  be  applied  to  Womens  Breafts  that  grow 
fore  by  the  abundance  of  Milk  coming  into 
them  :  as  alfo  to  reprefs  the  overmuch  blee;^  Gan- 
ding  of  the  Hemorrhoids  to  cool  the  Inflama- 
tion  of  the  parts  therabouts,  and  to  |ivc  eafdf 
pains.  The  Roots  of  Comfry  taken  frefhi 
beaten  fmal,  and  fpread  upon  Leather,and  laid 
upon  any  place  troubled  with  the  Gout,  do 
prefently giveeafof  the  pains;  and  applied 
hr  the  fame  manner  giveth  eaf  to  painedjoynts 
and  profiteth  very  much  for  running  and  moift 
Ulcers  3  Gangrenes,  Mortifications,  and  the. 
like,  for  which  it  hath  by  often  experience 
been  found  helpful. 

This  is  alfo  anHerb  of  and  I  fup- 

pofe  under  the  Sign  Capricorn,  cold,  dry,  and 
earthy  in  quality,  what  was  fpoken  of  Clowns 
Woundwort  may  be  faid  of  this.  .  . 

^  •f’ ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^ 

Coftmary,  or  Alecoft.' 

THis  is  fo  frequently  known  to  be  an  In¬ 
habitant  in  almoft  every  Garden,  that  1 
fuppofe  it  needlefs  to  write  a  Deferipti- 
tion  therof.  ,  ,  ' 

flme. 

It  Flowreth  in  June  anS  July, 

Venues  and  ufe. 

Hht  ordinary  Coftmary  as  wdl  as  Maudlin,  P>lfi^'>7} 
provoketh  Urin  abundantly,  and  moiftneth 
the  hardnefs  of  the  Mother  3  It  gently  purgeth 
Choller  and  Flegm,  extenuating  that  which  is  Flegm,pii- 
grofs,  and  cutting  that  which  is  tough  and  trefa^ion, 
gluttenous,  clenfeth  that  which  is  foul,  and  Corrupti- 
hindreth  putrefadtion  and  corruption,  it  dif-  on,Obftru^ 
folveth  without  Attradion,  openeth  Obftru-  Elions 
dions,  and  healeth  their  evil  effeds,  and  is  a  ^otidian 
wonderful  help  to  al  forts  of  day  Agues.  It  is  Agues, 
aftringent  to  the  Stomach,  and  ftrengtheneth 
N  the 


38 


The  En^UJh  fhyfitian. 


Liver i  the  Liver  and  al  the  other  inward  parts,  and 
taken  in  Whey,worketh  the  more  efFeftually. 
T aken  failing  in  the  morning,  it  is-  very  pro- 
Head-achj  fitable  for  the  pains  in  the  Head  that  are  con¬ 
tinual,  and  to  ftay,  dry  up,  and  confume  all 
Kherpprhi  thinR^ewms,  ordiftillations  from  the  Head 
into  the  Stomach,  and  helpeth  much  to  digeft 
Hu.-  raw  humors  that  are  gathered  therein.  It  is 
mms.  vtry  profitable  for  thofe  that  are  fallen  into  a 
continual  evil  diipofition  of  the  whol  Body 
CAcheniai  called  being  taken  efpecially  in  the 

beginning  of  the  Difeaf :  It  is  an  efpecial 
friend  and  help  to  evil,  weak,  and  cold  Livers. 
The  Seed  is  familiarly  given  to  Children 
^  for  the  Worms,  and  fo  is  the  infufion  of  the 

Flowers  in  white  Wine,  given  thega  to  the 
Quantity  of  two  ounces  at  a  time :  It  maketh 
Ulcers.  an  excellentSalve  to  clenf  and  heal  old  Ulcers, 
being  boyled  with  Oyl  Olive,  and  Adders 
Tongue  with  it :  and  after  it  is  ftrained,  to 
put  a  little  Wax,  Rozin,  and  Turpentine  to 
bring  it  into  a  convenient  Body. 


Cud  weed, or  Cottonweed. 

*  Vefeription.  . 

He  common  Cudweed  rifeth  up  but  with  I 
one  Stalk  fomtime,  and  fomtimes  with 
two  or  three,  thick  fet  on  all  fides  with  fmall 
long,  and  narrow  whitifli  or  wooly  Leavs 
from  the  middle  of  the  Stalk  almoft  up  to  the 
top ;  with  every  Leaf  llandeth  a  final  Flower, 
of  a  dun  or  brownifh  yellow  colour,  or  not 
fo  yellow  as  others  s  in  which  Heads  after  the 
Flowers  are  fallen  come  final  Seed  wrapped  up 
with  the  down  therin  and  is  erried  away  with 
the  Wind.  The  Root  is  fmall  and  thred- 

There  are  other  forts  hereof,  which  arc 
fomwhit  le-fler  than  the  former,  not  much  dif¬ 
ferent,  fave  only  that  as  the  Stalk  and  Leavs 
are  (horter,  fo  the  Flowers  are  paler, and  more 
open. 

Place. 

They  grow  in  dry,  barren,  Tandy,  and  gra¬ 
velly  Grounds,  in  moil  places  of  this  Land. 

Time. 

They  Flower  about  Tome  earlier.  Tome 
later,  and  their  Seed  is  ripe  in  Auguft. 

Venues  and  ufe. 

Bind)  Dry,  The  Plants  are  all  aftringent,  or  binding 
and  drying,  and  therfore  profitable  for  De- 
finxiohs  ofRhewm  from  the  Head,  and  to 
Fluxes j  ftay  Fluxes,  of  Blood  wherfoever.  The  De- 

coftion  being  made  into  redWinc  and  drunk, 
or  the  Pouder  taken  therin  j  it  alfo  hdpeth 
the  Bloody  Flux,  and  eafeth  the  torments 
Terms  lU  that  come  therby ,  ftayeth  the  immoderate 
(lopped)  Cdurfes  of  Women,  and  is  alfo  good  for  in¬ 


ward  or  outward  Wounds,  Hurts, and  Bruifes,  Ruptures  , 
and  helpeth  Children  both  of  Burftings  and  Worms, 
the  Worms  j  and  the  Difeaf  called  TenafmuS)  Tenafmus, 
which  is  an  often  provocation  to  the  Stool, 
and  doing  nothing,  being  either  drunk  or  in- 
jefted:  The  green  Leavs  bruifed  and  laid  to 
any  green  Wound  ftaieth  the  bleeding,  Wounds, 
healeth  it  up  quickly  :  The  Decoftion  or  Bleeding, 
juyeetherof  doth  the  fame,  and  helpeth  all 
old  and  filthy  Ulcers  quickly ;  The  juyee  oixjlcers, 
the  Herb  taken  in  Wine  and  Milk  is  (as  T li¬ 
ny  faith)  a  Sovereign  remedy  ,againfl:  the 
Mumps  and  Quinfie  3  and  further  faith.  That  ^tdnfy. 
whofoever  ftial  fo  take  it,  ftial  never  be  trou"*  ^ 
bled  with  that  Difeaf  again. 

Venus  n  Lady  of  it. 

CowflipSt 

BOth  the  Wild  and  Garden  Cow  (lips  are 
fo  wel  known  that  I  wH  neither  trouble  ■ 
my  felf  nor  the  Reader  with  any  defeription  of 
them. 

Time. 

» They  Flower  in  April  and  May. 

Vertues  and  Vfe. 

The  Flowers  are  held  to  be  more  efTcftUal 
than  the  Leavs ,  and  the  Roots  of  little 
ufe.  Wrinkles, 

An  PyUtmerif  being  made  with  them  taketh  ^^nbur- 
away  Spots,  and  Wrinkles  of  the  Skin,  Sun- 
burning  and  Freckles,  and  ads  Beauty  excee-  Lleat)Wind, 
dingly  :  They  remedy  all  infirmities  of  the 
Head  coming  of  Heat  and  Wind,  as  Vertigo,  ^s,V erti- 
Ephialtes,  falf  apparitions,Phrcnfies,  Falling-  gOiRphial- 
ficknefs,  Palfies,  Convulfions,  Cramps,  Pains 
in  the  Nerves  :  The  Roots  eaf  pains  in  the  '^ulfion. 
Back  and  Bladder,  and  open  the  paflages  of  Cramp, 
Urine The  Leavs  are  good  in  Wounds,  and  RuckBlad- 
the  Flowers  take  away  trembling  :  If  the  Flo- 
wers  be  not  well  dried  and  kept  in  a  warm  Wounds, 
place,  they  wil  foon  putrifie  and  look  green.  Trembling, 
have  a  fpecial  eye  over  them if  you  let  them  Frens^, 
fee  the  Sun  once  a  Month,  it  wil  do  neither  Falling- 
the  Sun  nor  them  harm. 

Becauf  they  llrengthcn  the  Brain  and  Fdfey. 
Nerves,  and  remedy  Palfies  the  Greeks  gave 
them  the  name  Frralijis  3  The  Flowers  pre- 
ferved  or  conferved,  and  the  quantity  of  a 
Nutmeg  eaten  every  morning,  is  a  fufficient 
Dole,  for  inward  Difeafes,  but  for  Wounds 
Spots,  Wrinkles,  and  Sunburning,  an  Oynt- 
ment  is  made  of  the  Leavs  and  Hogs  greaf. 

Kewrw  laies  claim  to  the  Herb  as  her  own, 
and  it  is  under  the  Sign  Aries,  and  our  City 
Dames  know  wel  enough  the  Oyntment  or 
Diftilled  Water  of  it,  adds  Beauty,  or  at 
leaft  reftdres  it  when  it  is  loft. 


Sciatica- 


* 

Sciatica-Creffes. 

Vefcription. 

THefe  are  of  two  kinds  i  The  firft  rifeth 
up  with  a  round  Stalk  about  two  foot 
high  fpread  into  diverf  Branches,  whofc  lower 
Xeavs  arc  fomwhat  larger  than  the  upper,  yet 
all  of  them  cut,  or  torn  on  the  edges,  fomwhat 
like  imto  Garden- Creffes,  but  fmaller :  The 
Flowers  are  fraal  and  white,  growing  at  the 
tops’of  the  Branches,  where  afterwards  grew 
Husks  with  final  brownifti  Seed  thcrin,  very 
ftrong  and  lharp  in  taft,  zwore  than  the  Cref¬ 
fes  of  the  Garden :  The  Root  is  long,  white 
and  woody. 

The  other  hat  h  the  lower  leavs  whol,  fom¬ 
what  long  and  broad  not  torn  at  al,  but  only 
fomwhat  deeply  dented  abooit  the  edges  to¬ 
wards  the  ends,  but  thofe  that  grovy  up  higher 
are  lefler.  The  Flowers  and  Seed' are  like  the 
former,  and  fo  is  the  Root  likewife ;  and  both 
Root  and  Seed  as  (harp  as  it. 

VlAce> 

Thefc  gfow  by  the  way  fides  in  untilUd  pla-* 
ces,  and  oy  the  fides  of  old  Walls. 

Tme»  j  , 

They  Flower  in  the  end  of and  their 
*  Seed  is  ripe  iii  July. 

Vei'tms  and  ufe> 

The  Leavs,  but  efpecially  the  Roots  taken 
frefh  in  the  Sumer  time, beaten  &  made  into  a 
Pultis  or  Salve,  with  old  Hogs  Greaf,  and 
Sciatkaj  applied  to  the  place  pained  with  the  Sciaticaj 
to  continue  the  on  four  hours  if  it  be  on  a 
Man,  arid  two  hours  on  a  Woman  y  the  place 
afterwards  bathed  with  Wine  and  Oyl  miiced 
together,  and  then  wrapped  with  Wool  or 
Skins  after  they  have  fwet  a  little,wil  alfuredly 
cure  not  only  the  fameDifeaf  in  theHips,Huc- 
Cout,  klebone,  or  othcrofthc  Joynts,  astheCoutin 
Head-achy  the  Hands  or  Feet,  but  all  other  old  Griefs  of 
Khmmsy  the  Head  (as  inveterate  Rhewms)  and  other 
part  ot  the  Body  that  is  hard  to  be  cured :  And 
it  of  the  former  Griefs  any  part  remain  j  the 
fame  Medicine  after  twenty  dales  is  to  be  ap¬ 
plied  again.  The  fame  is  alfo  efFeftual  in 
Spice-, ly  the  Dileafcs  of  the  Spleen  :  and  applied  to  the 

Scarsy  U-  it  taketh  away  the  blemifhcs  thcrof,whe- 
frofiiy  ther  they  be  Scars,  Leprofie,  Scabs  or  Scurf : 
Scurfy  which  although  it  exulcerate  the  part,  yet  that 
Ssaht.  to  be  helped  afterwards  with  a  Salve  made 
of  Oyl  and  Wax. 

Eiteem  of  this  as^another  Secret. 


Water-CrefTes. 

Defc'Hptmu 

OUr  ordinary  WMer-Crejfes  fpreadeth 
forth,  with  many  weak  hollow  fappy 
Stalks,  fhooting  out  fibres  at  the  Joynts,  ana 
upwards,  long  winged  Leavs,  made  of  fundry 
broad,  fappy  and  almoft  round  Leavs  of  a 
brownifh  green  colour.  The  Flowers  are  ma¬ 
ny  and  white,  Handing  on  long  Footftalks,  af¬ 
ter  which  come  fmall  yellow  Seed,  contained 
in  final  long  pods  like  Horns :  The  whol 
Plant  abideth  green  in  the  Winter,  and  talkth 
fomwhat  hot  and  lharp. 

Place. 

They  grow  (for  the  moft  part)  jnthe  final 
Handing  Waters,  yet  fomtimes  in  fmal  Rivu¬ 
lets  of  running  Water. 

Time.  ■ 

They  Flower  and.  Seed  in  the  beginning  of 
Summer. 

.  Venms  and  ufe. 

They  arc  more  powerful  againH  the  Scurry,  Seuniy, 
and  to^  cknf  the  Elood  and  Humors  than  BloodyHu^ 
Brooklime  is,  and  fctve  in  al  the  other  ufes  in  mors  yS ton 
which  Brooklime  is  available,  as  to  brede  thK  jyifuryy 
Stone,  and  provoke  Orin,  andWomens  Cour-  Terms  pra¬ 
tes.  The  Deceftion  thcrof  elenfeth  Ulcers  vo^es,  Vl- 
by  walking  them  therwith.  The  Leavs  Brufed,  cersy  free- 
or  the  Joyce, is  good  to  be  applied  to  the  Face,  l^lesy  Tim¬ 
or  other  parts  troubled  with  Freckles, Pimples,  pleSySpotSy 
Spots,  or  the  like,  at  night,  and  walked  away  Dulnef, 
in  the  morning,  Th&Juyce  mixed  vihhYi-  Lethargy. 
neger,  and  the  forepart  of  the  Head  bathed 
theswith,  is  very  good  for  thofe  that  are  dull 
and  drowCe,  or  have  the  Lethargy. 

Water-crefs  Pottage  is  a  good  Remedy  to 
clenfthe  Blood  in  the  Spring,  and  help  Head¬ 
aches,  and  confume  the  ^ols  Humors  Winter 
hath  left  behind ,  thofe  that  would  live  in 
health  mayufeit  iftheypleaf,  if  they  will  not 
I  cannot  help  it;  If  any  fancy  not  Pottage  they 
may  eat  the  Herb  as  a  Sallet. 

Crofswort. 

♦ 

Txfciiptio-a.^  » 

He  Common  Crofwort  groweth  up  with 
fquare  hairy  browii  Stalks,  Ijtttle  above 
a  Foot  High^having  four  final  broad  and  poin¬ 
ted  hairy,  yet  finooth  green  Leavs,  growing  a|; 
every  Joynt,  each  againH  other  Crofs  waies, 
which  hath  caufed  the  name :  Toward  the 
tops  of  the  Stalks  at  the  Joynts  with  the  Leavs 
in  three  or  four  rows  upwards,Hand  fmal  pale, 
yellow  Flowers,  after  which  come  fmal  Mac- 
N  a  kilhj 


40 


Wounds 

inrodrd  & 

mtwand, 

Flegm^Ob- 

ftruSlions, 

Stomneh, 

BoTvelSi 

’Ruptures. 


The  EngUJh  fhyjitian. 


Viftia  round  Seed,  -four  for  the  tnoft  part  fet  in 
every  Husk.  The  Root  is  very  fmal  and  full 
of  Fibres,  or  Threads,  taking  good  hold  of 
the  ground,  andfpreading  with  the  Branches 
a  oreat  deal  of  ground,  whieh  perifheth  not  in 
Winter,  although  the  Leavs  die  every  year, 
and  fpi'ing  again  anew. 

Tlace. 

It  groweth  in  many  moift  grounds  as  well 
Meadows,  as  untilled  places  about  London-  In 
Hamfted  Church-yard,  at  Wye  in  and 

fundry  other  places. 

Time. 

It  Flowreth  from  May  al  the  Summer  long 
in  one  place  or  other,  as  they  are  more  open 
to  the  Sun  j  and  the  Seed  ripeneth  foon  af¬ 
ter. 

Vertues  andufe. 

This  is  a  lingular  good  Wound  Herb,  and 
isuled  inwardly,  not  only  to  flay  bleeding  of 
Wounds,  but  to  confolidate  them,  as  it  doth 
outwardly  any  green  Wounds,  which  it  quick¬ 
ly  fodercth  up  and  healeth.  The  Decoftion  of 
the  Herb  in  Wine,  helpcth  to  expedorate 
Flegm  out  of  the  Chefi,  and  is  good  for  Ob- 
flruftions  in  the  Breaft,  'Stomach,  or  Bowels, 
and  helpeth  a  decayed  Appetite  j  It  is  alfo 
goodtowalh  any  Wound  or  Sore  with,  to 
clenf  and  heal  it :  The  Herb  bruifed  and  then 
boyled  and  applied  outwardly  for  certain  daies 
together,  renewing  it  often,  and  in  the  mean 
time,  the  Decodion  of  the  Herb  in  Wine  ta¬ 
ken  inwardly  every  day,  doth  certainly  cure 
the  Rupture  in  any,  fo  as  it  be  nor  too  invete¬ 
rate  ;  but  very  fpeedily  if  it  be  frefh  and  late¬ 
ly  taken. 

Crowfoot. 

ABundance  are  the  forts  of  this  Herb,  that 
to  deferibe  them  all  would  tire  the 'Pa¬ 
tience  even  of  Socfates  himfelf,  but  becauf  I 
have  not  yet  attained  to  the  Spirit  of  SocyateS} 
lihall  but  delcribcthemoftufual. 
Vefcnption- 

The  nioft  common  Crowfoot  hath  many 
dark  green  Leavs  cut  into  diverf  parts,  in  taft 
biting  &fharp,biting  &blifieringtheTongue, 
it  bears  many  Flowers  and  thofe  of  a  bright 
refplendcnt  yellow  colour,  I  do  ndt  remem¬ 
ber  that  ever  I  faw  any  thing  yellower.  Vir¬ 
gins  in  Ancient  time  ufed  to  m^e  Pouder  of 
them  to  ftrew  Bride  Beds,  after  which  Flowers 
come  fmal  heads  of  Seeds,  round,  but  tugged 
like  a  Pine  Apple. 

Place. 

They  grow.very  common  every  where,  un- 
iefs  you'run  yourHead  into  a  Hedg  you  cannot 
chufe  but  fee  feme  of  .them  wherever  you 

walk. 


Tim. 

They  Flower  ,  in  zndjune,  even  till 
September. 

j  'ifames. 

Many  are  the  Names  this  furious  biting 
Herb  hath  obtained,  almoft  enough  to  make 
up  a  Welch-mans  Pedegrec,  if  he  fetch  it  no 
further  than  John  of  Gaunt  of  william-  the 
Conqueror,  for  it  is  called  Fregs-foot  from  , 
the  Greek  name  ^cLTfocK/cv,  Cnwfoot,  Gold 
Knobs,  Gold  Cups,  King  K^b,  Bajfnets,  Troll 
Flower,  Tolts,  Loclicr  G onions,  and  Butttcr- 
F  lowers. 

'  ..  Vertues  andufe. 

This  fiery  and  hot  fpirited  Herb  of  Mars  is 
no  way  fit  to  be  given  inwardly,  but  an  Oynt- 
ment  of  the  Leavs  or  Flowers  wil  draw  a  Bli- 
fter,  and  niay  fo  be  fitting  .applied  to  the  nape 
ofthe  Neck  to  draw  back  PJiewm  from  the 
Eyes, the  Herb  being  bruifed  and  mixed  with 
a  little  Muftard,  draws  a  Blifteras  well  and 
asperfeftlyas  Cantharides,  and  with  far  lefs 
danger  to  the  Veflels  of  Llrin,  which  Can- 
tharides  Naturally  delight  to  wrong,  I  knew 
the  Herb  once  applied  to  a  Peftilential  rifing 
that  was  falling  dqwn,  and  it  faved  life  even 
beyond  hope,  it  were  good  keeping  an  Oynt- 
ment  and  Plaifter  of  it  if  it  were  but  for 
that. 

Cuckowpint,  or  Wake- 
Robin. 

Vefeription. 

His  fhooteth  forth  three,  four,  or  five 
Leavs  at  the  moft  from  one  Root,  every 
one  wherof  is  fomwhat  large  and  long,  broad 
atthe  bottom  next  the  Stalk,  and  forked,  but 
ending  in  apointjWithout  cut  on  the  edges,  of 
a  ful  green  colour,  each  ftanding  upon  a  thick 
round  Stalk,  of  a  hands  breadth  long  or  more: 
among  which  after  two  or  three  Months  that 
they  begin  to  wither,  rifeth  up  a  bare  round 
whitifh  green  Stalk,  fpotted  andflraked  with 
purple,  fomwhat  higher  than  the  Leavs  :  at 
the  top  wherof  ftandeth  a  long  hollow  Hofc  or 
Husk,  clofe  at  the  bottom,  but  open  from  the 
middle  upwards  ending  in  a  point  •,  in  the 
middle  wherof  ftandeth  a  fmal  long  Peftle  or 
Clapper,  fmaller  at  the  bottom  than  at  the  top, 
of  a  dark  purple  colour  as  the  Husk  is  on  the 
infide,  though  green  without  5  which  after  it 
hath  fo  abidden  for  feme  time,  the  Husk  with 
the  Clapper  decayeth,  and  the  foot  or  bottom 
therof  groweth  to  be  a  fmal  long  Bunch  of 
Berries,  green  at  the  firft,  and  of  a  yellowifti 
red  colour  when  they  are  ripe,  of  the  bignefs 
of  an  Haiel  Nut  Kernel  j  which  abide  ther- 
on  almoft  until  Winter  j  The  Root  is  round 


The  Englijh  ^hyjttian. 


Toy  [on 
Plague, 


Boyl 


and  fomwhat  long,  for  the  moft  part  lying  a- 
long,  the  Leavs  fliooting  forth  at  the  bigger 
end,  which  when  it  beareth  his  Berries,  is 
fomwhat  wrinkled  and  loof,  another  being  1 
growing  under  it, which  is  folid  and  firm  with  ' 
many  final  threads  hanging  therat :  The  whol 
Plant  is  of  a  veiy  fharp  biting  tail,  pricking 
the  Tongue  as -Nettles  do  the  Hands,  and  fo 
abidcih  for  a  great  while  without  alteration  : 
The  Root  hereof  was  anciently  ufed  inftead 
of  Starch  to  ftarch  Linnen  withal. 

There  is  another  fort  of  Cuc^owpnt)  with 
leifer  Leavs  than  the  former,  and  fbmwhatj 
harder ,  having  blackifti  fpots  upon  them 
which  for  the  moft  part  abide  longer  green  in 
Summer  than  the  former  j  and  both  Leavs 
and  Roots  are  more  (harp  and  fierce  than  it : 
In  al  things  elf  it  is  like  the  former* 

Place. 

Thefe  two  forts  grow  frequently  almoft  un¬ 
der  every  Hedg  fide  in  many  places  of  this 
Land. 

Time.' 

They  Ihoot  forth  Leavs  in  the  Spring,  and 
conpnue  but  until  the  middle  of  Summer,  or 
fomwliat  later,  their  Husks  appearing  before 
they  fall  awayj  and  their  Fiuit  Ihewing  in 
Augufi. 

Twenties  and.  Vfe. 

Tr agios  reporteth  that  a  dram  weight,  or 
more  if  need  be,  of  thefpottedfra^e-Kol'iw, 
either  frefh  and  green,  or  dried,  being  beaten 
and  taken  is  a  moft  prefent  andfure  Remedy 
for  Poyfon  and  the  Plague.  The  juyee  of  the 
Herb  taken  to  the  quantity  of  a  fpoonful  hath 
the  fame  effed.  But  if  there  be  a  little  Vine¬ 
gar  added  therunto  as  well  as  unto  the  Root  a- 
forefaid,  it  fomwhat  allayeth  the  ftiarp  biting 
taft  therof  upon  the  Tongue.  The  green 
Leavs  bruifed  and  laid  upon  any  Boyl  or 
Plague  Sore,  doth  wonderfully  help  to  draw 
forth  the  Poyfon :  A  dram  of  the  Pouder  of 
the  dried  Root  taken  with  twice  fo  much  Su¬ 
gar  in  the  form  of  a  licking  Eleftuary,  or  the 
green  Root  doth  wonderfully  help  thofe  that 
I>ifficulty  arepurfieand  fliort  winded,  as  alio  thofe  that 
of  breath,  ®  Cough  •,  it  breaketh,  digefteth,  and 
Cough,  riddeth  away  Flegm  from  the  Stomach,  Cheft, 
and  Lunp.  The  Milk  wherin  the  Root  hath 
been  boyled  is  effeftual  alfo  for  the  fame  pur- 
pofe.  The  faid  Pouder  taken  in  Wine  or  o- 
ther  Drink  j  or  the  Juyee  of  the  Berries,  or 
the  Pouder  of  them ;  or  the  Wine  wherein 
they  have  been  boyled,  provoketh  Urine,  and 

-  bringeth  down  Womens  Courfes,  and  purgeth 

frovo\es,  them  effedlually  after  Child-bearing  to  bring 
Afterbinh  om-dj  the  Afttr-birth.  Taken  with  Sheeps 
Vlcers,  Milk  it  healcth  the  inward  Ulcers  of  the  Bo¬ 
wels.  The  diftilled  Water  herof  is  effedual 
to  all  the  purpofes  aforelaid  j  A  Ipoonful  ta¬ 
ken  at  a  time  healeth  the  Itch  j  And  an  ounce 
Itch)  Rup-  or  more  taken  at  a  time  for  fome  daies  toge- 
tures.  ther  doth  help  the  Rupture  j  The  Leavs  ci- 


Tlegm, 


Dlfury, 

Terms 


Tofipufl 

Eyes 


ThYoat, 

Jaavsy 


Gout, 
Piles,  Of 
Hemiff^ 
rhoids. 
Funda¬ 
ment  fal¬ 
ling  down. 
Scurf, 
Freddies, 
Spots, 
Blemijhe%, 


ther  green  or  dry,  or  the  Juyee  of  them,  doth 
clenlall  manner  ofrotten  and  filthy  Ulcers  m 
what  part  of  the  Body  foever,  and  healeth  the 
{linking  Sores  in  the  Nofe  called  Tolipus. 
The  Water  wherin  the  Root  hath  been  boyled 
dropped  into  the  Eyes,  clenfetfi  them  from  a- 
ny  Film  or  Skin, Clouds  or  Mifts  which  begin 
to  hinder  the  Sight,  and  helpeth  the  watering 
or  rednefs  of  them  j  or  when  by  fome  chance 
they  become  black  and  blue.  The  Root  mix¬ 
ed  with  BeanFlower  and  applied  to  theThroat 
or  Jaws  that  are  inflamed  helpeth  them.  The 
Juyee  of  the  Berries  boyled  in  Oyl  of  Rofes, 
or  beaten  into  Pouder  and  mixed  with  the 
Oyl,  and  dropped  into  the  Ears  and  eafeth 
pains  in  them.  The  Berries  or  the  Roots 
beaten  with  hot  Ox  Dung, and  applied,  eafeth 
the  pains  of  the  Gout.  The  Leavs  and  Roots 
boyled  in  Wine  with  a  little  Oyl,  and  applied 
to  the  Piles,  or  the  falling  down  of  the  Funda¬ 
ment  eafeth  them  ,  and  fo  doth  fitting  over 
the  hot  fumes  therof.  The  frelh  Roots  brui¬ 
fed,  and  diftilled  with  a  little  Milk,  yieldeth  a 
moft  Sovereign  Water  to  clenf  the  Skin  from 
Scurff,  Freckles,  Spots,  or  Blcmifties  whatfo- 
ever  therin. 

Authors  have  left  large  Commendation  of 
this  Herb  you  fee,  but  for  my  part  I  have  nei¬ 
ther  fpoken  with  Pyu-Reafon,  not  Dt.  expe¬ 
rience  abow  it.  ^  ■ 

Daifies. 


THcfe  are  fo  well  known  to  almoft  c- 
very  Child,  that  I  fuppofe  it  is  al¬ 
together  needlefs  to  write  any  Dc- 
feriptionof  them.  Take  therfore 
the  Vertues  of  them  as  followcth. 

Vertues  and  vfe. 

The  greater  wild  TPaifie  is  a  Wound  Herb 
of  good  refpe(ft,  often  ufed  in  thofe  Drinks  or 
Salvs  that  arc  for  Wounds^  cither  inward  or 
outwards.  The  Juyee  or  diftilled  Water  of 
thefe,  or  the  final  ’Vaifes,  doth  much  temper 
the  heat  of  Choller,  and  refrefheth  the  Liver 
and  other  inward  parts.  A  Decodion  made 
of  them  and  drunk,  helpeth  to  cure  the 
Wounds  made  in  the  hollownefs  of  the  Breaft; 

The  fame  alfo  cureth  al  Ulcers  and  Puftles  in 
the  Mouth  or  T onguc,  or  in  the  fecret  parts. 

The  Leavs  bruifed  and  applied  to  the  Cods, 
or  to  any  other  parts  that  are  fwollen  and  hot.  Swellings, 
doth  refolve  it  and  temper  the  Heat ;  A  Deco- 
dion  made  hereof  withWalwort  and  Agrimo¬ 
ny,  and  the  places  fomented  or  bathed  there¬ 
with  warm,  giveth  great  eaf  to  them  that  arc* 
troubled  with  the  Palfy,  Sciatica,  or  the  Gout. 

The  lame  alfo  dilperfeth  and  diflolveth  the 
Knots  or  Kernels  that  grow  in  the  Fleih  of  a-  R^ernels  ] 
^  ny 


Wounds', 
Inward  & 
outward, 
Choller, 
Liver, 

Breafl, 

ulcers. 


4^ 


The  Englijh  ^hyjitim. 


BruifeSj  ny  part  of  the  Body^and  the  Bruifes  and  Hurts 

FalLsi  that  come  of  Fals  and  Blows :  They  are  alfo 
Ruptures,  ufed  for  Ruptures,  and  other  inward  Burnings 
Burnings,  with  very  good  fuccefs.  An  Oyntment  made 
Infiamu-  hereof  doth  wonderfully  help  al  Wounds  that 
tions.  have  Infiamations  about  them,  or  by  reafon 
of  moift  humors  having  accefs  unto  them,  are 
kept  long  from  healing,  and  fuch  are  thofe  for 
the  moft  part  that  happen  in  the  Joynts  of  the 
Arms  or  Legs.  The  Juyce  of  them  dropped 
into  the  running  Eyes  of  any  doth  much  help 
them. 

The  Herb  is  under  the  Sign  Cancer, and  un- 
'  derthe  Dominion  of  Venus,  and  therfore  ex¬ 
cellent  good  for  Wounds  in  the  Breaft,and  ve¬ 
ry  fitting  to  be  kept  both  in  Oyls,Oyntments, 
and  Plaiftersj  as  alfo  in  Syrup. 

Dandelyon, 

Vulgarly  called, 

Pifs-a-beds. 

Defcriptim- 

THis  is  wel  known  to  have  many  long  and 
deeply  galhed  Leavs  lying  on  the  ground, 
round  about  the  Head  of  the  Root  j  the  ends 
of  each  Gafli  or  Jag  on  both  fides  looking 
downwards  towards  the  Root,  the  middle  rib 
being  white  which  broken  yieldcth  abundance 
of  bitter  Milk,but  the  Root  much  more :  from 
among  the  Leavs  which  alwaics  abide  green, 
arife  many  flendcr,  weak,  naked  Footualks, 
every  one  of  them  bearing  at  the  top  one  large 
yellow  Flower,  confifting  of  many  rows  of 
yellow  Leavs,  broad  at  the  points  and  nicked 
in,  with  a  deep  fpot  of  yellow  in  the  middle, 
which  growing  ripe,  the  green  Husk  wherin 
the  Flower  ftood,  turneth^t  felf  down  to  the 
Stalk,  and  the  Head  of  down  becometh  as 
round  as  a  Ball,  with  long  reddifh  Seed  under¬ 
neath, bearing  a  part  of  the  Down  on  theHead 
of  every  one,  which  together  is  blown  away 
with  the  Wind,  or  may  be  at  once  blown  a- 
way  with  ohes  Mouth.  The  Root  growth 
.downwards  exceeding  deep,  whichbeing  bro¬ 
ken  off  within  the  ground,  wil  notwithftan- 
ding  ftipot  forth  again  j  and  wil  hardly  be  de- 
ftroyed  where  it  hath  once  taken  deep  Root  in 
the  ground. 

‘  Vlace. 

It  groweth  frequent  in  al  Meadows  and  Pa- 
^  fture  Grounds. 

Time. 

ItFlowreth  in  one  place  or  other  almoft  all 
the  ycerlohg. 

Vermes  and  ufe> 

Openeth,  It  is  of  an  opening  and  clenfing  quality,  and 

Clenfeth,  therfore  very  effeftual  for  the  Obftruftions  of 
Ob^u^i-  the  Liver,  Gall,  and  Spleen,  and  the  Difeafes 
m. 


1  iver. 
Gall, 
Spleen, 
Jaundxcc, 
Hypochon¬ 
driacal 
Melan- 
cholly, 
Dijury, 
Confup-  . 
iion. 

Cachexia , 
ivatching, 
Heat,Agu, 
P  e  ft  Hence  ^ 


that  arife  from  thcm,as  the  Jaundice,&  Hypo- 
condriacal  Pafllon  :  It  wonderfully  openeth 
the  Paffages  of  the  Urin  both  in  yong  and  old. 

It  powerfully  clenfeth  Appfthumes,  and  in¬ 
ward  in  the  Uritory  paffages,  and  by  the  dry¬ 
ing  and  temperate  quality  doth  afterwards 
heal  them  j  for  which  purpofe  the  t)eco£i:ion 
ofthe  Roots  or  Leavs  in  white  Wine,  or  the 
Leavs  chopped  as  Potherbs  with  a  few  Alli- 
fanders  and  boyled  in  their  Broth,  is  very  effe- 
dual.  And  whofo  is  drawing  towards  a  Con- 
fumption,or  an  il  Difpofition  of  the  whol  Bo¬ 
dy  called  Cachexia,  by  the  ufe  herof  for  feme 
time  together  ftial  find  a  wonderful  help ;  Il 
helpeth  alfo  to  procure  reft  and  fleep  to  Bodies 
diftempered  by  the  Heat  of  Ague  Fits,  pr  o- 
therwife.  The  diftilled  Water  is  effeftual  to 
drink  in  Peftilential  Feavers,  and  to  walhthe 
Sores.  * ' 

You  fee  here  what  Vertues  this  common 
Herb  hath,  and  that’s  the  reafon  you  French 
and  Dutch  fo  often.cat  them  in  the  Spring  j 
and  now  if  you  look  a  little  further  you  may 
fee  plainly  without  a  pair  of  Spcdakles,  that 
Forraign  Phyfitians  are  not  fo  felfifh  as  ours 
are,  but  more  communicative  of  the  Vertues 
of  Plants  to  People. 

Darnel. 

Vefeription. 

’^jj  'His  hath  all  the  Winter  Iong,fundry  long, 

-*■  fat,  and  rough  Leavs,  which  when  the 
Stalk  rifeth,  which  is  flender  and  joynted,  are 
narrower,  but  rough  ftil  j  on  the  top  groweth 
a  long  fpike  compofed  of  many  Heads,  fet  one 
above  another,  containing  two  or  three  Husks 
with  (harp,  but  fhort  Beards  or  awns  ^x.  the 
ends  5  the  Seed  is  eafily  fhaked  out  of  the  Ear, 
the  Husk  it  felf  bein^  fomwhar  tough.  , 

Place. 

The  CountryHusbandmen  do  know  this  too 
well  to  grow  among  their  Corn  t  or  in  the 
Borders  and  Pathwaics  of  other  Fields  that 
are  fallow.  •  , 

Vertues  and  ufe. 

As  this  is  not  without  fome  Vices,  fo  hath 
it  alfo  many  Vertues.  The  Meal  of  ’Darnel 
is  very  good  to  ftay  Gangreans,and  other  fuch 
like  fretting  and  eating  Cankers,  and  putrid 
Sores  :  It  alfo  clenfeth  the  Skin  of  al  Lepries, 
Morphews,  Ringworms,  and  the  like,  if  it  be 
ufed  with  Salt  and  Rhadifh  Roots.  And  being 
ufed  with  quick  Brimftone  and  Vinegar,  it 
diffolveth  Knots  and  Kernels,  and  breaketh 
thofe  that  are  hard  to  be  diiiolved,  being  boy- 
led  in  Wine  with  Pidgeons  Dung  and  Lin- 
feed  :  A  Decoftiontlierof  made  with  Water 
and  Honey,  and  the  place  bathed  therwith,  is 
profitable  for  the  SciaUca.  Daanel  Meal  ap-  Sciatica, 

plied 


Gang)- cans 

Cancers, 

Leprofie, 

Morphew, 

T{ing-  . 

worms. 


The  Englijh  ^hyfitian. 


4J 


plid  in  >  Pulti., 


broiicn 

"Rones, 

Viabets. 


broken  boyW  in  reJWine  ana 

nnl  all  Chet  Pteea,  Womens  bloody  1^ 
fues;  andreftraincthUim  tkatpaffeth  away 
tiooftiddenly. 

Dill. 


T)efcnption>  - .  r  i 

'He  common  groweth  up  with  lel- 
■  dom  more  than  onp  Sta^,  neither^  lo 
high,  nor  fo  great  ufually  as  Fennel,  being 
rownd,  and  with  fewer  Joynts  theron,  whofe 
Leavs  arc  fadder,  and  fomwhat  long,  and  io 
like  Fennel  that  it  deceiveth  many  i  but  har¬ 
der  in  handling  and  fomwhat  thicker,  and  of 
a  ftronger  unpleafanter  Cct :  The  5 
Stalks  have  four  Branches  and  fmaller  Umbels 
of  yellow  Flowei-s,  which  turn  into  fma  becd 
fomwhat  Batter  and  thinner  than  Fennel  See^ 
The  Root  is  fmall  and  woody,  perilhing  ev^ 
ry  year  after  it  hath  ^born  Seed  j  and  is  alio 
unprofitable,  being  never  put  to  any  ule. 

Place-  ,  ( 

It  is  moft  ufually  fown  in 
Grounds  for  the  purpofe,  &  is  alfo  found  wdd 

with  us  in  fomc  places.  I 

Vermes  and  Uje. 

The  m  being  boyled  f^d  drunk  is  good  to  | 
Swellings,  eaf  Swellings&  pains,it  alfo  the  Belly, 

and  Stomach  from  calling  :  TheDecodion 
LoofneCu  thereof  helpeth  Women  that  are  troubled  with 
y  omitmg,  jjjepaifis  and  W  indiuefs  of  the  Mother, it  they 
Mother,  p^^rin.  It  ftayeth  the  Hiccough,  being 
^  Ig^jnWine  and  but  fmelledtmto,  being 
Ratv  and  ^  The  Seed  is  of  more  ufe  than 

mgb  Bn-  Leavs,  and  more  effedual  to  digelt  raw 

and  vifcuous  humors,  andisufed  in  Medicines 
mnd,  pIjj^p  pepvp.  po  expel  Wind  and  the  pains  procec- 
Apopms,  pherfrom.  The  Seed  being  toafted  or 
Ulcers.  gp^a  ufed  in  Oyls  or  Plaifters,  difiol- 

veth  the  Impofthumes  in  the  Fundament,  and 
drieth  up  all  moift  Ulcers  (efpecially  in  me 
fecret  parts.)  The  Oyl  made  ofPi^  isefFc- 
dual  to  warnt,  to  refolve  Humors  and  Impolt- 

humes,  to  eafpains  and  to  procure  reft. 

Terms  The  Decodion  of  Dill  be  it  HeiJ>  or  Seed 
provokes,  (only  if  you  boyl  the  Seed  you  mull  bruif  it) 
in  white  Wine,  being  drunk  is  a  gallant  ex- 
peller  of  Wind  and  provoker  of  the  Terms. 


A  Learned 
,  Tale  that 


Devils-bit. 

Vefeription. 

THis  rifeth  up  with  a  roimd,  green,  fmooth 
Stalk  about  two  foot  high,  fetwith  diverf 

O  2 


long  and  fomwhat  narrow,  fmoothjdark,green 
Leavs,  fomwhat  fnip’d  about  the  edges  for  the  . 
moft  part,  being  elf  al  whol  and  not  divided  at 
al  or  but  very  feldom,  even  to  the  tops  of  the 
Branches  which  yet  are  fmaller  than  thofe  be¬ 
low,  with  one  Rib  only  in  the  middle,:  At  the 
end  of  each  Branch  ftandeth  a  round  Head  of 
many  Flowers  fet  together  in  the  fame  man¬ 
ner  or  more  neatly  than  the  Scabious,  and  of  a 
more  blewilh  purple  colour  J  which  being 
paft  there  followeth  Seed  that  fallerh  away. 

*The  Root  is  fomwhat  thick,  but  Ihort  and 
blackilli  with  may  Strings,  abiding  after  Seed 
time  many  yeers.  This  Root  was  longer  un¬ 
till  the  Devil  (as  the  Fryars  fay)  bit  away  the 
reft  of  it  for  fpight,  envying  its  ufefulnefs  un- 
to  Man-kind.  For  fure  he  was  not  troubled  ^ 
with  any  Difeaffor  which  it  is  proper.  Pryarf  je- 

There  are  two  other  forts  hereof  in  nothing 
unlike  the  former,  fave  that  the  one  beareth 
White ,  and  the  other  Blulh  colour’d  Flo¬ 
wers. 

Tlace. 

The  firft  groweth  as  well  in  dry  Meadows 
and  Fields,  as  irioift,  in  many  places  of  this 
Land  :  But  the  other  two  are  more  rare,  and 
hard  to  meet  with,  yet  they  arc  both  found 
growing  wild  about  Appledore,  ncer  Tlye  in 
%em. 

Time. 

They  Flower  not  ufually  untill  AuguP 
Ve’itiees  and  ufe. 

The  Herb  or  Root  (all  that  the  Devil  hath  ^ 

left  of  it)  being  bo'yled  in  Wine  and  drunk  is 
very  powerful  againft  the  Plague,  and  all  Pe-  Peplence, 
ftilential  Difeafes  or  Feavers,  Poyfons  alfo,  Feavers, 
and  the  bitings  ofVenemous  Beafts  j  It  alfo  Poyfon, 
helpeth  thofe  that  are  inwardly  bruifed  by  any  ^ enemoM 
cafualcy,  ar  outwardly  by  Falls  or  Blows,  dif-  Beafis, 
folving  the  clotted  Blood :  and  the  Herb  or  Bmifes, 
Root  beaten  and  outwardly  applied,  taketh  a-  Falls, 
way  the  black  and  blue  Ma^ks  that  remain  in  Clotted 
the  Skin.  The  Decoftion  of  the  Herb,  with  Blood, 
Honey  of  Rofes  put  therin  is  very  cfFeftual  to 
help  the  inveterate  tumors  and  Swellings  of  Swellings 
the  Almonds  and  Throat,  by  often  gargling  of  the 
the  Mouth  therwitb.  It  helpeth  alfo  to  pro-  Throat, 
cure  Womens  Ccrurfes,  and  eafeth  all  pains  of  Mother, 
the  Mother,  and  to  break  and  difeufs  Winds  pt  ind, 
therein  and  in  the  Bowels.  The  Pouder  of  the  worms. 
Root  taken  in  Drink, driveth  forth  theWorms  womds, 
in  the  Body:  Thejuyee,  or  diftilled  Water 
of  the  Herb  is  eflfeftual  for  green  Wounds,  or  jtch,  Dan- 
old  Sores, and  clenfeth  the  Body  inwardly, and  driff,Pim~ 
the  Seed  outwardly ,  from  Sores ,  Scurff,  pies,  Free- 
Itches,  Pimples,  Freckles,  Morphew,  or  O'  l^es.  Mer¬ 
its  deformities  therof ,  but  efpecially  if  phew. 
a  little  Vitriol  be  diflblvcd  therin. 


Dock* 


44 


The  EngliJ!)  ^hyjitian. 


Tlux, 

Loathing 

of  Meat, 

Spuing 

Blood, 

Scabs, 

Itch, 

Tre  cities, 
Morphew 


Dock. 

THcfe  are  Co  wel  known  many  kinds  of 
them,  that  I  fhall  not  trouble  you  with 
a  Dcfcription  of  them  j  my  Book  grows 
big  too  fall.  ' 

Venues  and  Ufe, 

All  of  them  have  a  kind  of  cooling  (but  not, 
all  alike^  drying  qualify  the  Sorrels  being 
moll  cold,  and  the  Bloodworrs  moll  drying: 
Of  the  Bur-Dock  I  have  Ipoken  already,  by 
himfelf.  The  Seed  of  moll  of  the  other  kinds 
whether  of  the  Garden  or  Field,  do  Hay  Lasks 
or  Fluxes  of  all  forts,  the  loathings  of  the 
Stomach  through  Choller,  and  is  helpful  to 
thofe  that  fpit  Blood.  The  Roots  boyled  in 
Vinegar  helpeth  the  Itch,Scabs,and  breakings 
out  of  the  Skin,  if  it  be  bathed  therwith.  The 
Dillilled  Water  of  the  Herb  and  Roots  hath 
the  fame  Vertuc,  and  clenfetbthc  Skin  of 
Freckles,  Morphews,  and  all  other  Spots  and 
Difcolourings  therm. 

All  Docks  being  boyled  with  Meat,  make  it 
boyled  the  fooner:  Befide  Bloodwort  is  excee¬ 
ding  ftrcngthning  to  the  Liver,  and  procures 
good  Blood,  being  as  wholfom  a  Pot  Herb  as 
any  grows  in  a  Garden,  yet  fuch  is  the  nicity 
of  our  times  forfooth,  that  Women  will  not 
put  it  in  the  Pot  bccaufit  makes  the  Pottage 
black,Pridc  and  Ignorance  (  a  couple  of  Mon- 
ilers  in  the  Creation)  preferring  Nicity  ,  be¬ 
fore  Health. 

Dodder  ofTime^  or  Epi- 
thimum,4wd  other 
Dodders. 


’Defeription, 

TH!s  firll  from  Seeds  giveth  Roots  in  the 
Ground,  which  Ihooteth  forth  threads 
or  Strings,  grolTcr  or  finer,  as  the  pro¬ 
perty  of  the  Plant  wherein  it  groweth,  and  the 
Climate  doth  fulFer,  creeping  and  fpreading 
on  that  Plant  wheron  it  fallneth,  be  it  high  or 
low.  Thefe  Strings  have  no  Leavs  at  all  upon 
them,  but  wind  and  interlace  themfelves  fo 
thick  upon  a  fmal  Plant  that  it  taketh  away  all 
comfort  of  the  Sun  from  it,  and  is  ready  to 
choke  or  ftrangle  it ;  After  thefe  Strings  are 
rifen  up  to  that  Height  that  they  may  draw 
Nourifhment  from  the  Plant,  they  feem  to 
be  broken  off  from  the  ground,  either  by  the  1 
ftrength  of  tha  riling, or  withered  by  the  heat  j 


of  the  Sun.  Upon  thefe  Strings  are  found  clu- 
Kers  of  fmall  Heads  or  Husks,  out  of  which 
uart  forth  whitifli  Flowers,  which  afterwads 
give  fmal  pale  Colour’d  Seed  lomwhat  flat,  and 
twice  as  big  as  Poppy  Seed.  It  generally  par¬ 
ticipates  of  the  Nature  of  that  Plant  which  it 
climbeth  upon,  but  the  Dodder  of  Tim  is  ac¬ 
counted  the  bellj  and  is  the  only  true  Epithi- 
murfi. 

,  ^  ^  Venues  and  ufe.  .  . 

This  is  accounted  the  moll  effcdlnal  for  Me-  *fpj 
lanchollick  Difeafes,  and  to  purge  black  or  runff  aj 
burnt  Choller,  which  is  the  cauf  of  many  Dif- . 
eafes  of  the  Head  and  Brains,  as  alfo  for  the  jJ  r-  ^  " 
trembling  of  the  Heart,  faintings,  and  Swou-  , 

nings.  It  is  helpful  in  all  Difeafes  and  Griefs 
of  the  Spleen,  and  of  that  Melancholly  that  • 
arifeth  from  the  windinefs  of  the  Hyptfthon-cJ^^^'^^* 
dria.  It  purgeth  alfo  the  Reins  or  Kidneys  by 
Urin  It  openeth  Obftruftions  of  the  Gall, 
wherby  it  profiteth  them  that  have  the  Taun- 
dice  ■,  as  alfo  of  the  Liver,  and  Spleen  j  pur- 
ging  the  Veins  of  Chollcrick  and  Flegmatick 
Humors,  and  helpeth  Childrens  Agues,  a  w  " 
little  Wormfeed  being  put  therto.  Jaundice, 

The  other  iDoddeys  do  (as  I  faid  before)  ^'uef, 
participate  of  the  Nature  of  thofe  Plants 
whereon  they  grow  ;  As  that  which  hath  been 
^und  growing  upon  Nettles  in  the  Well 
Countrvj  hath  by  experience  been  found  very 
effeaualtoprpcure  plenty  of  Urin,  where  it 
hath  been  flopped  or  hindred.  And.  fo  of  the 
relli 

All  Dodders  are  under  Saturn,  Tell  not  me 
of  Phyfitians  crying  up  Epithimum,  or  that 
Dodder  which  grows  upon  Tim  (moll  of 
which  comes  from  Hymettus  in  Greece,  or  Hy- 
bla  in  SicMia,  becauf  thofe  Mountains  abound 
with.riwe)  he  is  a  Phyfitian  indeed  that  hath 
wit  enough  to  chufe  his  Dodder  according  to 
Nature  of  the  Difeaf  and  Humor  peccant,  we 
confefs.  Time  is  the  hottell  Herb  it  ufually 
grows  upon,  and  therforc  that  which  grows 
upon  Time  is  hotter  thin  that  which  grows  up¬ 
on  colder  Herbs,  for  it  draws  Nourilhment 
from  what  it  grows  upon  as  well  as  from  the 
Earth  where  its  Root  is,  and  thus  you  fee  old 
is  wife  enough  to  have  two  Strings  to 
his  Bow. 

Sympathy  m6.  Antipathy,  arettfe  two  Hin¬ 
ges  upon  which  the  whol.Moddel  ofPhyfick 
turns,  and  that  Phyfitian  which  minds  them 
not  is  like  a  Door  off  from  the  Hooks,  more 
likely  to  do  a  man  a  mifehief  than  to  fecure 
him  :  then  all  the  Difeafes  Saturn  caufeth,this 
helps  hySympathy,8c^tenp.hcns  al  the  parts  of 
the  Body  he  rules,  fuch  as  caufed  hySol  it  helps 
hy  Antipathy,  what  thofe  Difeafes  are  fee  my 
Judgment  of  Difeafes  by  Aftrology,  and  you 
be  pieafed  to  look  the  Herb  Wormwood,  you 
lhai  find  a  Rational  way  for  it. 


The  Eiiglijh  Thyjttian. 


45 


4*  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  *1^ 

Dogs-Grafs  • 

OR 

Quich-Grafs. 


Defcrlption. 

IT  is  well  If^iown  that  [this  Grafs  crcepcth 
far  about  under  ground  with  long  white 
joynted  Roots,  aftd  final  fibres  almoft  at  every 
Joynt  very  fwcet  in  tall,  as  the  reft  of  the 
Herb  is,  and  interlacing  one  another,  from 
whence  fhoot  forth  many  fair  long  graffy 
Leavs,  finall  at  the  ends  and  cutting  or  fharp 
on  the  edges.  The  Stalks  are  joynted  like 
Corn  with  the  like  Leavs  on  them,  and  a  long 
fpiked  Head  with  long  Husks  on  them  and 
hard  rougb  Seed  in  them. 

Flace. 

It  greWeth  commonly  through  this  Land  in 
diverf plowed  grounds,  to  the  no  final  trouble 
of  the  Husbandman,  asalfoofthe  Gardiners 
in  Gardens  to  weed  it  out  if  they  can,  for  it 
is  a  conliantCuftomcr  to  the  place  it  gets  foo¬ 
ting  in. 

Venues  and  ufe. 

This  is  the  moft  Medicinable  of  all  the 
^ith-graffes  :  Being  boyled  and  drunk  it  o- 
peneth  Obftruftions  of  the  Liver  and  GalU 
^  *  and  the  ftoppings  of  the  Urin,  and  eafeth  the 

n  7  ’  pains  of  the  Belly,  and  Inftamations  J 

waueth  the  matter  of  the  Stone  in  theBladder, 
'iipingy  Ulcers  thereof  alfo  ;  The  Roots  bru- 

^  applied  doth  confolidate  Wounds  : 

,  1  j  The  Seed  doth  more  powerfully  etpel  Urin, 

attd  ftaycth  the  Lask,  and  Vomitings  j  The 
’  j  dillilled  Water  alone,  or  with  a  little  Worm- 
killeth  the  Worms  in  Children. 

iroms  Roots,  and 

^  having  well  boyled  them  in  white  Wine, drink 
the  Dccodion  5  ’tis  opening,  but  not  pur¬ 
ging  very  fafej  ’tis  a  Remedy  againft  all  Dif- 
Stopping^  ea^cs  coming  of  Stopping  and  fuch  are  half 
thofc  which  are  incident  to  the  Body  of  manj 
and  although  a  Gardiner  be  of  another  opini¬ 
on,  yet  a  Phyfitian  holds  half  an  Acre  of 
them  to  be  worth  five  Acres  of  Carrots  twice 
told  over. 


Dovesfoot,  or  Cranes= 

bill. 


T>efmpUon. 

THis  hath  diverf  fmall,  round,  pale,  greeri 
Leavs,  ait  in  about  the  edges,  much  like 
Mallows,  ftandingupon  long  reddifh  hairy 

V 


Stalks  lying  in  a- round  compafs  upon  the 
ground  i  among  which  rife  up  two  or  three, 
or  more  reddifh  Joynted,  flender,  weak,  arid 
hairy  Stalks,  with  fome  fuch  like  Leavs  there¬ 
on,  but  fmaller,and  rhore  cut  in  up  to  the  tops, 
where  grow  many  very  final,  bright,  r^  Flo¬ 
wers  of  five  Leavs  apiece,  after  which  follow 
final  Heads,  with  fmalfhort  beaks  pointing 
forth,  as  all  other  forts  of  thefe  Herbs  do. 

Place. 

It  groweth  in  Failure  Grounds,  and  by  the 
Path  fides  in  many  places,  ^dwilalfo  be  in 
Gardens. 

Time. 

It  Plowreth  in  June,  July,  and  Augury 
fome  earlier,  and  fome  later,  and  the  Seed  is 
ripe  (Quickly  after. 

Veriues  and  ufe. 

It  is  found  by  experience  to  be  fingular 
good  for  the  Wind  Chbllick,  and  pains  there¬ 
of,  as  alfo  t<p  expel  the  Stone  and  Gravel  in 
the  Kidnies.  The  Decoftion  thereof  in  Wine 
is  an  exceeding  good  Wound  Drink  for  thofe 
,  that  have  inward  Wounds,  Hurts,  6r  Bruifes, 
both  to  flay  the  blceding,to  difTolvc  and  expel 
^  the  congealed  Blood,  and  to  heal  the  parts,  as 
;  alfo  to  clenf,  and  heal  outward  Sores,  Ulcers, 
j  and  Fiftulaes  5  and  for  green  Wounds  many 
!  do  but  bruife  the  Herb,  and  apply  it  to  the 
•  ^ace,  and  it  healeth  them  quickly.  The  fame 
.Dccoftion  in  Wine  fomented  to  any  place 
pained  with  the  Gout,  or  to  joynt-aches,  or 
pain,  of  the  Sinews  giveth  much  eaf.  The 
Pouder,  or  Decoftion  of  the  Herb  taken  fbr 
fome  time  together’is  found  by  experience  to 
be  fingular  good  for  Ruptures,  and  Burftings 
^  in  People,  either  yong  or  old. 

Ducksmeat. 

THis  is  fo  well  known  to  fwim  on  the  top 
of  Handing  Waters,  as  Ponds,  Pools, 
and  Ditches,  that  k  is  needlcfs  further  to  de- 
feribeit.  ‘ 

Venues  and  fife. 

It  is  effedual  to  help  Inflamations,,  and  St. 
Anthonies  fire,  as  alfo  the  Gout,  either  appli¬ 
ed  by  it^  fclf,  or;  in  a  Puhis  with  Barley  Me^. 
The  diftillcd  Water  herof  is  by  fome  highly  e- 
fteemed,  againft  all  inward  Inflamations,  and 
Peftilent  Fcavers  i  as  dfo  to  help  the  rednefs 
of  the  Eyes,  the  Swellings  of  the  Cods,  and 
of  the  Breafts  before  they  be  grown  too  much. 
The  frefh  Herb  applied  to  the  Forehead,  ca- 
feth  the  Pains  of  the  Head-ach  coming  of 
heat. 

Cancer  claims  the  Herb,  and  the  Moon  wil 
be  Lady  of  it,  a  word  is  enough  to  a  Wife 
man/ 

JDown. 


Choliig  ^  « 
Sten  k* 
vely  ,Gr a 

Wounds^ 
Cong^algcL 
Bloody 
SereSy  uh 
ctrsy 

Fiftiilaesy 
Gout,  Si- 
news. 
Ruptures^ 


Inflamati¬ 
ons,  St. 
Anthonies 
FireyPe(ti- 
knee. 

Eyes 

Swillings 
of  the 
Cods, 
Headach, 


V 


The  En^lijh  Thyjltian, 


Down,  or  Cotton= 

Thiftle. 

Defcription. 

His  hath  many  large  Leavs  lying  on  the 
groundj  fomwhat  cut  in,  and  as  it  were 
crumpled  on  the  edges,  of  a  green  colour  on 
the  upper  fide,  but  covered  over  with  a  long 
hairy  WoqI,  or  Cottony  Down,  fet  with  molt 
fharp,  and  cruel  pricks}  from  the  middle  of 
whofe  Heads  of  Flowers,  thruft  forth  many 
f*urplifti,  CrimfonTreds,  andfomtimes  (al¬ 
though  more  fcldom)  white  ones.  The  Seed 
that  followeth  in  thei'e  Heads,  lying  in  a  great 
deal  of  fine  white  Down  is  fomwhat  large, 
long,  and  round,  like  the  Seed  of  LadicsThi- 
ftle,  but  fomwhat  paler.  The  Root  is;  great 
‘  and  thick  fpreading  much,  yet  it  ufually  dieth 
.  after  Seed  time. 

Place. 

Itgroweth  ondiverf  Ditches  Banks,  and  in 
the  Corn-fields,  and  Higb-waies  generally  e- 
very  where  throughout  the  Land. 

Time. 

j '  i 

It  Flowreth  and  bearcth  Seed  about  the  end 
of  Summer,  when  other  Thiftles  do  Flower 
and  Seed. 

Venues  ani  ufe. 

Tlihy  and  ’Diofeorides  write,  That  the 
Leavs  &  Roots  hereof  taken  in  Drink,helpeth 
iVry  thofe  that  have  a  Crick  in  their  Neck,  wher- 
by  they  cannot  turn  their  Neck  but  their  whol 
Body  muft  turn  alfo  (Sure  they  do  not  mean, 
thofe  that  have  got  a  Crick  in  their  Neck  by 
being  tmder  the  Hangmans  Hands.)  Galen 
faith  that  the  Root  and  Leavs  hereof  are  of  an 
heating  quality,  and  good  for  fuch  Perfons  as 
have  their  ,  Bodies  drawn  together  by  feme 
SpafmuSi  Jpa/wc  or  Convulfion  j  as  it  is  with  Children 
Convulfien  xhttha.\txht  Rickets,  or  rather  (as  the  Col- 
Kkknsy  ledgofPkyfitians  will  have  iO  the 

for  which  name  for  the  Difcaf,  they  have  (in 
a  particular  Treatife  lately  fet  forth  by  them) 
Learnedly  Difputed,  and  put  forth  to  the  pub- 
lick  view,  thatthe  World  may  fee,  they  took 
much  pains  to  little  purpofe. 

Mars  owns  the  Plant,  and  manifefts  to  the 
World,  that  though  it  may  hurt  your  Fingers 
it  will  help  your  Body,  for  I  fancy  it  much  for 
the  Premifes. 


TheEIderTree. 


I  Hold  it  needlefs  to  write  any  Defcripti¬ 
on  of  this,  fith  every  Boy  that  plaics 
with  a  Potgun,  will  not  miftakc  another 
T rcc  inftead  of  Elder.  I  lhall  therfore 
in  this  place  only  deferibe  the  Dwteef  Elder, 
called  allo  Daneivoni  and  n'aletym. 

The  Dwarf  Elder. 

Defcription. 

'J’HIs  is  but  an  Herb  every  yeer  dying  with 
his  Stalks  to  the  ground,  andrifing  again 
afreih  every  Spring  }  and  is  like  unto  the  El¬ 
ders  both  in  form  and  quality,  rifing  up  with 
a  four  fquare  rough  hairy  Stiik  four  foot  high 
or  more  fomtimes.  The  winged  Leavs  are  , 
fomwhat  narrower  than  the  Elder,  but  elf  very 
like  them.  The  Flowers  are  white  with  a  dafh 
of  Purple  itariding  in  Umbels,  very  like  the 
Elder  aIfo,but  more  fweet  in  feent,  after  which 
come  final  blaekiih  Berries,  full  of  juyee  while 
they  are  frefti ,  wherein  there  lie  fmal  hard 
Kernels  or  Seed.  The  Root  doth  creep  under 
the  upper  cruft  of  the  ground,  fpringing  a-  ■ 
frefli  in  diverf places  being  of  the  bignefs  of 
ones  finger  or  Thumb  fomtimes. ' 

Places. 

Tne  EWer-Trw  groweth  in  Hedges,  being  , 
planted  there  to  ftrengthen  the  Fences,  and 
Partitions  of  Grounds,  and  to  hold  up  the 
Banks  by  Ditches,  and  Watcr-courfes. 

The  Dwarf  Elder  groweth  Wild  in  many 
phees  of  England,  where  being  once  gotten 
into  a  Ground  it  is  not  eafily  gotten  forth  a- 
gain.  .  ' 

Tims. 

Moft  of  the  Elder-Trees  Flower  in  June, 
and  their  Fruit  is  ripe  for  the  moft  part  in  Au- 
gufl. 

But  the  Dwarf  Slder, ox  iVaUwort  Flowreth 
fomwhat  later,  and  his  fruir  is  not  ripe  untii 
September. 

Venues  and  vfe. 

The  fifft  Shoots  of  the  common  Elder  boy- 
led  like  Afparagus,  &  the  yong  Leavs  &  Stalks 
boyled  in  Fat  Broth,  doth  mightily  carry  forth 
Flegm  and  Choller.  The  middle  or  inner  Plcgm, 
Bark  boyled  in  Wata',  and  given  to  drink  choller, 
worketh  much  more  violently  j  and  the  Ber¬ 
ries  either  green  or  dry,  expel  the  fame  hu¬ 
mors,  and  is  often  given  with  good  fuccefs  to 
help  the  Dropfie.  The  Bark  of  the  Root  Dropfe, 

boyled 


The  Englip  ThyJitiM. 


4/ 


J^rain, 
Ear  S3 


boyledinWine,  or  thejuycc 

wovkerhthe  fame  effcas,  ?wce 

ly  than  cither  the  Leavs  or  Frtut.  The  JHyce 

of  the  Root  taken  doth  mightily  ^ 

mitj  and  puigeth  the  watery  taken 

Dropfic.  TheDecodion  oftheRoot  wke 

Vtnemous  cureth  the  bitins;  of  the  J-  At.« 

Bealis,  Mad  Dogs ;  It  mollifieth  the  hardnefs  of  the 

MudT>o(rs3  Mother,  i*  Women  fit  thcrin,^ndopeneth  th^ 

Terms  ''  Veins,  and  bringeth  down 
p-ovokes.  The  Berries  boyled  in  Wine 
^  fame  effed  5  and  the  hair  ofthe  Head  walhcd 

therwith  is  made  black.  The  juyee  o 
inflamati-  green  Leavs  applied  to 

the  Tunicles  of  the  Brain.  The  Joyce  of 
Berries  boyled  with  a  little  Honey  and  drop¬ 
ped  into  the  Ears,  helpeth  the  pains  of  them. 
The  Decodion  ofthe  Bernes  inWine^ing 
^rine  no-  <lrunk  provoketh  Urine.  The  diftiUed  Water 
"  ,  of  the  Flowers  is  of  much  ufe  to  clear  the  Skm 

Smb^-  from  Sunburning,  Freckles,  M®rphcw,  or  the 
r!mz  Frec-  like  j  and  taketh\way  Headaches  coming  of 

i/i  W-  acoldcauf,thcHcad  being 

fh  w  The  Leavs  or  Flowers  diftilled  in  the  Month 

&ach  ofW  and  the  Legs  often  waftied  with  the 
*  faid  difelle^  Water,  it  taketh  away  the  Ulceis 
and  Sores  of  them:  The  Eyes  waihedte- 
with,  it  taketh  away  thcitednefs  and  Blood- 
Ihot :  And  the  Hands  wafted  morning  and 

evening  therwith  helpeth  the  Palfeyj  and  fta- 

king  of  them.  r  1  u 

The  Dwarf  Elder  is  mote  powerful  than 

the  Common  Elder,  in  opening  and  purging 
Choller,Flegm,  andWater,  in  helping  the 
Gout,  the  Piles,  and  Womens  Difeafes,  colo- 
flamation,  reth  the  Hair  black,  helpeth  Inflamation  m 
B  urningi  the  Eyes,  and  pains  in  the  Ear s  5  the  hning  o 
Scaldm,  Serpents  or  a  Mad  Dog,  Burnings  and  c 

ChoUic\)  dings, the  wind  Chollick,Chollick  and  rone, 

the  difficulty  of  Urine,  the  cure  of  old  bores, 
and  Fiftulous  ulcers. 

Either  Leavs  or  Bark  of  Elder  ftrippcd  up¬ 
ward  as  you  gather  it  caufeth  Vomiting,  but 
ftripped  downward  it  purgeth  downwards. 
Alfo  Dr.  Ewt/cr  in  a  Manufeript  of  his  com¬ 
mends  to  the  Sky  for  Di^opfies, 

to  drink  it  being  boyled  in  white  Wine, 
to  drink  the  Decoction  I  mean,  not  the  El¬ 
der. 

The  Elm-Tree.  ■ 


THis  Tree  is  fo  well  known,  growing  ge¬ 
nerally  in  all  Countries  of  this  Land  i 
that  it  is  necdlefs  to  deferibe  it. 

yertues  and  Vfe- 

The  Leavs  herof  bruifed,  and  applied  hea- 
Icth  green  Wounds  lacing  bound  thereon  with 


Ulcers. 


Talfey. 


Gout  In¬ 


ns  oviti'Bdsk  The  Leavs  or  the  Bark.ufcd^o«^  > 
with  Vinegar,  cureth  Scurf,  and  Lepry  very 
effeaually:  The  Decoaion  ofthe  Leavs, TcpiPj'O 
Bark,  or  Root,  being  bathed,  healeth  broken 
Bones.  The  Water  that  is  found  in  the  Blad¬ 
ders  on  the  Leavs,  while  it  is  freft,  is  very  ef¬ 
fectual  to  clenf  the  Skin  and  make  it  fair :  and  Beauty^ 
if  clothes  be  often  wet  therin  and  applied  to 
the  Ruptures  of  Children  it  helpeth  them  j  if  BuptureSy 
they  be  after  wel  bound  up  with  a  Trufs.  The 
faid  Water  put  into  a  Glafs,  and  fet  in  the 
Ground,  or  elf  in  Dung  for  twenty  five  daics, 
the  Mouth  therof  being  clofe  flopped}  and 
the  bottom  fet  upon  a  lay  of  ordinary  Salt, 
that  the  Feces  may  fettle  and  theW ater  become 
very  clecr,  is  a  fingular  and  Soveraign  Balm 
for  green  Wounds,  being  ufed  with  foft  tentst 
The  Decoftion  ofthe  Bark  of  the  Root  fo-  -  . 

mented  mollifieth  hard  tumors,  and  the  ftrin-  *  ^ 

king  of  the  Sinews.  The  Roots  of  the  Elftt 
boyled  for  a  long  time  in  Water,  and  the  fat~ 
rifing  on  the  top  therof  being  clean  feummed 
off,  and  the  place  anointed  therwith  that  is 
grown  Bald,  and' the  Hair  fallen  awav,  will 
quickly  reftorc  them  again.  TThe  faid  Bark, 
ground  with  Brine  and  Pickle  until  it  corns 
to  the  form  of  a  Pultis,  and  laid  on  the 
painod  with  the  Gout,  giveth  great  eaf.  The  G  oitty 
Decoaion  ofthe  Bark  in  Water  is  excellent  to  '  . 

bath  fuch  places  as  have  burned  with  fire.  * 


Slone, 
Vi  fury- 


Endive* 

Defeription- 

T He  common  Garden  Endive  bcarctn  a 
longer  and  a  larger  Leaf  than  Succory, 
and  abideth  but  one  yeer,  quickly  rtinning 
up  to  Stalk  and  Seed,  and  then  perifteth :  It 
hath  blue  Flowers,  and  the  Seed  of  the  erdi- 
nary  Endive  is  fo  like  Succory  Seed,  that  it  is 
hard  to  diftinguift  them. 


^  Venues  and  Vfe-  ' 

The  Decoaion  of  the  Leavs,  or'thc  Juyee,  ‘ 
or  the  diftilled  Water  of  Endive  ferveth  well  ^ 
to  cool  the  excelTive  Heat  in  the  Liver  and  Liver, 
Stomach,  and  in  the  hot  Fits  of  Agues,  and  Stoniachy 
all  other  Inflamations  in  any  part  of  the  Bo-  Agues, 
dy}  itcooleththehcat  and  ftarpnefs  of  the 
Urine,  and  the  Excoriations  in  the  Untory  of  Urme, 
parts}  The  Seed  is  of  the  fame  property  or 
rather  more  powerful,  andbefides  is  available  rf/ttzows 
for  the  faintings,  fwounings,  and  paffions  of  thereby, 
the  Heart.  Outwardly  applied  they  ferye  to  PaJJtpn  of 
temper  the  ftarp  Humors  of  frating  Ulceis,  the  Heart, 
hot  Tumors  and  Swellings,  and  Pci^ential 

Sores}  and  wonderfully  helpeth  not  only  the  SweUings, 

rednefs  and  Inflamation  in  the  Eyes,  but  the  Eyes, 
dimnefs  ofthe  Sight  alfo  :  They  ure  alfo  ufed  Gout-  ■ 
to  allay  the  pains  of  the  Gout. 


48 


The  Bnglijh  ThjJitiafi. 


You  cannot  ufe  it  amifsjaSyrup  of  it  is  a  fine 


Cold  Sto~ 
mach, 

Windy 

Stitch} 

Spleen} 

Cough} 

Short  tnefi 

of  Breath} 

U'heefing} 

Terms 

provokeS} 

Mother} 

StonC} 

PoyfoH} 

Venemoua 

Bea(lS} 

Vefti  lencC} 

Syes} 

worms. 


cooling  Medicine  for  Fcavers. 

Elecampane. 


Vefeription. 

^^His  fhooteth  forth  many  large  Lcavs, 
long,  and  broad,  lying  necr  the  gro^d, 
final  at  both  ends,  fomwhat  foft  in  handling, 
of  a  whitifti  green  on  the  upper  fide,  and  gray 
underneath,  each  fet  upon  a  (hort  Footllalk  j 
from  among  which  rife  up  diverf  great,  and 
ftrong  hairy  Stalks,  three  or  four  foot  high 
with  fomc  Leavs  thereon  compafiing  them  a- 
bout  at  the  lower  ends,  and  are  branched  to¬ 
ward  the  tops,  bearing  diverijreat  and  large 
Flowers  like  thofe  of  the  Corn  Marigolc^ 
both  the  Border  of  Leavs  and  the  middle 
thrum  being  yellow,  which  turn  into  Down ; 
with  long  fmall  brownifli  Seed  among  it,  and 
is  carried  away  with  the  wind.  The  Root  is 
great  and  thick,  branched  forth  diverf  waies, 
blackifh  on  the  outfide,  and  white  within,  of 
a  very  bitter  tali,  and  ftrong,  but  good  fent, 
efpecially  when  they  are  dryed,  no  part  elf  of 
the  Plant  having  any  finel. 

Place. 

It  grbweth  in  the  moift  Crounds,and  ihado- 
wy  places  oftner  than  in  the  dry  and  open  Bor¬ 
ders  of  Fields  and  Lancs,  and  in  other  waft 
places  almoft  in  every  County  of  this  Land. 

Time. 

It  Flowreth  in  the  end  of  June  and  July} 
and  the  Seed  is  ripe  in  Muguji}  The  Roots 
are  gathered  for  ulc,  as  well  in  the  Spring  be¬ 
fore  the  Leaves  come  forth,  as  in  Autumn  or 
Winter. 

Fertues  and  ufe. 

The  freih  Roots  of  Elecampane  preferved 
with  "Svigar, or  made  into  a  Syrup  or  Conferve, 
are  veryxiFeftual  to  warm  a  cold  and  windy 
Stomach,  or  the  pricking  tberin,  and  Stitches 
in  the  Sides  caufed  by  the  Spleen ,  and  to  help 
the  Cough,  (hoftnefs  of  Breath,  and  whee- 
fing  in  the  Lungs.  The  dried.  Root  made  in¬ 
to  Pouder,  and  mixed  with  Sugar  and  taken, 
ferveth  to  the  fame  purpofes,  and  is  alfo  pro¬ 
fitable  for  thofe  that  have  their  Urine  ftopped  j 
or  the  ftopping  of  Womens  Courfes ,  the 
pains  of  the  Mother,  and  of  the  Stone  in  the 
Reins,  Kidneys,  or  Bladder :  It  refifteth  Poy- 
fon,  and  ftaycth  the  fpreading  of  the  Venom 
of  Serpents,  as  alfo  of  putrid  and  peftilential 
Feavers,  and  the  Plague  it  fclf.  The  Roots 
and  Herb  beaten  and  put  into  new  Ale  or 
Beer,  ^  dayly  drunk,  clcareth,  ftrengthneth, 
and  quffkncth  the  Sight  of  the  Eyes  wonder¬ 
fully.  The  Decoftion  of  the  Roots  in  Wine 
or  the  juyee  taken  therin,  killeth  and  driveth 
forth  all  manner  of  Worms  in  the  Belly,  Sto¬ 


mach,,  and  Maw  ;  and  gargled  in  the  mcuih  j 
or  the  Root  chewed  faftneth  Icof  Teeth,  and  LoofTceth 
helpeth  to  keep  them  from  Putrefadion :  ^ 

And  bein^^  drunk  is  good  for  'thofe  that  fpit  Sphtinz 
Blood,  helpeth  to  remove  Cramps  or  Con-  Blood 
vulfions,  and  the  pains  of  the  Gout,  the  Scia-  CrampSy 
tic  a,  the  loofnefs  and  pains  in  the  Joynts,  or  Convulh- 
thofe  Members  that  are  outofjoynt,  by  cold  onsyGum 
or  moifture  hapnlng  to  them,  applied  out-  Joynts  ^ 
wardlyaswell  as  inwardly,  and  is  good  for  itch}  ^ 
thofe  that  are  burften,  or  have  any  inward 
bruif.  The  Roots  boyled  well  in  Vineger, 
beaten  afterwards  and  made  into  an  Oynt- 
ment,  with  Hogs  Suet  or  Oyl  of  Trotters  is 
an  excellent  remedy  for  Scabs  or  Itch  in  yong 
or  old;  The  places  alfo  bathed  or  walhed 
with  the  Decodion  doth  the  fame ;  it  alfo 
helpeth  all  forts  of  filthy,  old,  putrid  Sores  or 
Cankers  wherefoever.  In  the  Roots  of  this  Cankers 
Herb  lieth  the  chief  effed  for  all  theRemedies  "" 
aforefaid:  The  diftilled  Water  of  the  Leavs 
and  Roots  together  is  very  profitable  to  elenf  PrerklP  f 
the  Skin  of  the  Fece  or  other  parts,  from  any 
Morphew,  Spots,  or  Blemiflies  thereiny  and  spots 
maketh  it  deer.  ^  * 

Eringo,  or  Sea-Holly. 

Vefeription, 

'J'Hefirft  Leavs  of  our  ordinary  SeorHoUy} 
are  nothing  fo  hard  and  prickly  as,  when 
they  grow  old,  being  almoft  rouhd  and  deep¬ 
ly  dented  about  the  edges  J  hard,  and  ftiarp 
pointed,  and  a  little  crumpled,  of:  a  bluilli 

peen  colour, every  one  upon  a  long  Footftalk: 
but  thofe  that  grow  up  higher  with  the  Stalk, 

do  as  it  were  compafs  it  about.  The  ftalk  it 

fclf  is  round  and  ftrong,  yet  fomwhat  crefted 

with  Joynts  and  Leavs  let  therat,  but  more 

divided,  fliarp,  and  prickle ;  and  branches  ri- 

fing  from  thence,  which  have  likewife  other  / 

finaller  Branches,  each  of  them  bearing  feveral 

b'uifh  round  prickly  Heads,  with  many  final 

jagged  prickly  Leavs  under  them  ftanding  like 

a  Star,  and  are  fomtimes  found  grecnilh  or 

whitifti :  The  Root  groweth  wonderful  long, 

even  to  eight  or  ten  Foot  in  length,  fet  with 

Rings  or  Circles,  toward  the  upper  part,  but' 

fmooth  and  without  Joynts  down  lowcrjbrow- 

nifli  on  the  outfide,  and  very  white  within, 

with  a  pith  in  the  middle,  of  a  pleafant  taft, 

but  much  mere  being  artificially  preferved  and 

candy’dwvith  Sugar. 

-  'Place. 

It  is  found  about  the  Sea  Coafts,  in  almoft 
every  Country  of  this  Land  which  bordcreth 
upon  the  Sea. 

Time. 

It  Flowreth  in  the  end  of  Summer,  and  gi- 
vech  ripe  Seed  within  a  Month  after. 

V  Vertues 


49 


The  EitgUjh  Thyjitian. 


Vertms  and  ufe. 

The  Decoftion  of  the  Root  herof  in  Wine 
Obfiru^i-  is  very  effedual  to  open  the  Obftruftions  of 
ons,  the  Spleen  and  Liver,  and  helpeth  the  yellow 
Spleen,  Jaundice,  the  Dropfic,  the  pains  in  the  Loins, 
liver,  and  wind  Chollick,  provoketh  Urine,  and  ex- 
yeliow  pelleth  the  Stone,  and  procurcth  Womens 
Jaundice,  Courfes,  The  continued  ufe  of  the  Decodi- 
Dropfif,  on  for  1 5.  daies  taken  failing  and  next  to  Bed- 
ChoUicli,  ward,  doth  help  the  ftrangury,  thepifling  by 
drops,  the  flopping  of  Urine  and  Stone,  and 
Strangury,  all  defeds  of  the  Reins  or  Kidneys ;  and  if  the 
Reins,  faid  drink  be  continued  longer,  it  is  faid  that 
it  perfedly  cureth  the  Stone,  and  that  experi-t 
ence  hath  found  it  fo;  It  is  found  good  a- 
French  gainil  the  French  Pox.  The  Roots  bruifed 
Fox,  and  applied  outwardly,  helpeth  the  Kemcls  of 
Rjngs  the  Throat,  commonly  called  the  Kings  evil  5 

Evil,  or  taktn  inwardly  and  applied  to  the  place 

Venemotis  flung  or  bitten  by  any  Serpent ,  healeth  it 
Bealls,  fpeedily.  If  the  Roots  be  bruifed  and  boyled 
in  old  Hogs  greaf,  or  falted  Lard  and  applied 
Thorns,  iq  broken  Bones,  Thorns  &c.  remaining  in 
brol(en  the  Flefh  doth  not  only  draw  them  forth^  but 
Bones,  healeth  up  the  place  again,  gathering  new 
Splinters,  pi^fh  where  it  was  Confumed :  The  Juyc.c  of 
Thorns,  ^he  Leavs  dropped  into  the  Ears,  helpeth  Im- 
pQf^humes  therin  :  The  Diflilled  Water  of 
Melan-  ^hc  whol  Herb  when  the  Leavs  and  Stalks  arc 
choUy,  yong,  is  prufiUbly  drunk  for  all  the  purpofes 
^artan,  ^forefaid  i  and  helpeth  the  Melancholly  of 
tir  ^oti-  jjjg  Heart,  and  is  available  in  Quartane  and 
dian  A-  Quotidian  Agues,  as  alfo  for  them  that  have 
gfiis,  Necks  drawn  awry ,  and  cannot  turn 

tVrjFl ecks ,  ^hem,  without  turning  their  whol  Body. 

Seed  bree-  The  Plant  isVenerial,  andbreedeth  Seed 
exceedingly  and  flrengthens  the  Spirit  procre¬ 
ative,  it  is  hot  and  moift,  and  under  the  Goe- 
leflial  Ballance, 

Eyebright. 

1  •  *  ■ 

Dejcriptio'/ii 

He  common  Eyebright  is  a  fmall  low 
Herb ,  rifing  up  uuially  but  with  one 
blackifb,  green  Stalk,  a  fpan  high,  or 
not  much  more,  fpread  fromthe  bottom  in- 
*  to  fundry  Branches,  wheronarefet  final  and 
and  almofl  round,  yet  pointed  dark,  green, 
Leavs  finely  fnipped  about  the  edges,  two  al- 
waies  fet  together,  and  very  thick :  At  the 
Joynts  with  the  Leavs  from  the  middle  up¬ 
ward,  come  forth  fmall  white  Flowers  flryped 
with  purple  and  yellow  Spots  or  flripesj  af¬ 
ter  which  follow  fmall  round  Heads  with  ve¬ 
ry  fmall  ^cd  therin  t  The  Root  is  long, 
fmall,  and  threddy  at  the  end. 

Flacci 

It  groweth  in  many  Meadows,  and  grafly 
places,  in  this  Land. 


Verities  and  Vfe. 

If  this  Herb  were  but  as  much  ufed  as  it  is 
negle£led,  it  would  half  fpoil  the  Spedacle- 
m^ers  Trade  j  and  a  man  would  think  that 
reafon  fhould  teach  people  to  prefer  the  prefer- 
vation  of  their  Natural  before  Artificial  Spe- 
dacles :  which  that  they  may  be  inflrufted 
how  to  do,  take  the  Vertues  of  Eyebright  as 
followeth. 

Thejuyecor  diflilled  Water  oH  Eyebright 
taken  inwardly  in  white  Wine  or  Broth,  or 
dropped  into  the  Eyes  for  diverf  daies  toge¬ 
ther,  helpeth  all  infirmities  of  the  Eyes  that 
cauf  dimnefs  of  Sight }  Some  make  a  Conferv  Eyes^ 
of  the  Flowers  to  the  fame  cfFed  :  Being  ufed  Dimne(!, 
any  of  thele  waies  it  alfo  helpeth  a  weak  Brain 
or  Memory.  This  tunned  up  with  flrong  Memory> 
Beer  that  it  may  work  together,  and  drunk  j 
Or  the  Pouder  of  the.  dried  Herb.mixcd  with 
Sugar,  a  little  MaCe,  and  Fennel  Seeds,  and 
drunk  or  eaten  in  Broth  ;  Or  the  faid  Pouder 
made  into  an  Eleftuary  with  Sugar  and  taken, 
hath  the  fame  powerful  effeft  to  help  and  re- 
flore  the  Si|ht  decaiedthrough  age.  And  Ar~ 
noldtis  de  villa  nova,  faith.  It  hath  reflored 
Sight  to  them  that  have  been  blind  a  long 
time  before.  .  . 

It  is  under  the  Sign  of  the  Lyon,  and  Sol 
claims  Dominion  oven  it. 

Fern. 

« 

Deferipdom 

OF  this  there  are  two  kinds  principally  to 
be  noted ;  vi't^.  The  Male  and  Female; 

The  Female  groweth  higher  than  the  Male, 
but  thcLeavs  therof  are  leirer,&  more  divided 
or  dentedj  &  of  as  flrong  afmel  as  the  Male  : 

The  Vertues  of  them  are  both  alike  ;  and 
therfore  I  ftall  not  trouble  you  with  any  fur¬ 
ther  Defcription  or  diflinftion  of  them. 

Place. 

They  both  grow  on  Heaths,  and  in  fhidy 
places  neer  the  Hedg  fides  in  all  Countries  of 
this  Landr 

Time. 

They  flourifh  and  give  their  Seed  at  Mid- 
fummer. 

The  Femal  Fern  is  that  plant  which  is  in 
Sujjex  called  Brakes,,  the  Seed  of  which  fome 
Authors  hold  to  be  fo  rare,  fuch  a  thing  there 
is  I  know,,  and  may  eafily  Be  had  upon  Mid- 
fummer  Eve,  and  for  ought  yet  I  know  two 
or  three  daies  before  of  after;  if  nor  more. 

Vertices  and  Vfe. 

The  Roots  of  both  thefe  lorts  of  Ferns,  be^ 
ing  bruifed  and  boyled  in  Mead  or  Honyed 
Water,  und  drunk,  killeth  both  the  broad  and 
long  Worms  in  the  Body  j  and  abateth  the  JVorms, 
Qj,  Swelling 


JO 


The  Englijh  Thyjitian. 


Spleen,  Swelling  and  hardnefs  of  the  Spleen.  The 
green  Leavs  eaten,  purgeth  the  Belly  and 
Choller,  Chollerick  and  waterim  humors,  but  it  trou- 
Fiegm,  Stomach.  They  are  dangerous  for 

Stomach,  Wonien  with  Child  to  meddle  whh,  by  rea- 
fon  they  cauf  abortment.  The  Roots  brwifed 
and  boyled  in  Oyl  or  Hogs  greaf,  maketh  a 
Wounds,  very  profitable  Oyntment  to  heal  Wounds^  or 
pricks  gotten  into  the  Flefti.  The  Pouder  of 
Ulcers,  them  uied  in  foul  Ulcers,  drieth  up  their  Ma¬ 
lignant  moifture,  and  caufeth  their  fpeedier 
healing :  Fern  being  burned,  the  finoke  ther- 
Serpents,  ofdrivetliaway  Serpents,  Gnats,  and  other 
Gnats,  noifom  Creatures,  which  in  the  Fenny  Coun- 
Venemom  tries  do  in  the  night  time  trouble  and  moleft 
Beafls,  people  lying  in  their  Beds  with  their  Faces  un¬ 

covered  it  caufeth  Barrennefs. 

Ofmond  Royal,  or  Was¬ 
ter  Fern. 

Defeription. 

THis  (hooteth  forth  in  the  Spring  time 
(for  in  the  Winter  the  Leavs  perilh)  di- 
verfrough  hard  Stalks,  half  round  and  hollo- 
wiih,  or  flat  on  the  other  fide,  two  Foot  high, 
having  diverf  Branches  of  winged  ycllowifh 
green  Leavs  on  all  fides,  fet  one  againft  ano¬ 
ther,  longer,  narrower,  and  not  nicked  on  the 
edges  as  the  former  :  From  the  top  of  fome  of 
thefe  Stalks  grow  forth  a  long  Bufh  of  final, 
and  more  yellowifh  green  fcaly  aglets  as  it  were 
fet  in  the  fame  manner  on  the  Stalks  as  the 
Leavs  are  5  which  are  accounted  the  Flower 
andSeeds  5  The  Root  is  roughs  thick,  and 
Scaly,  with  a  white  pith  in  the  middle  which 
'  is  c^ed  the  Heart  therof. 

Tlace. 

It  growetfa  on  Moors,  Bogs,  and  Watery 
places  in  many  parts  of  this  Land. 

Time, 

It  is  green  all  the  Summer  5  and  the  Root 
only  abideth  in  Winter. 

Vmues  and  ufe. 

This  hath-all  the  Vertues  mentioned  in  the 
former  Ferns,  and  is  much  more  effeftual  than 
they  both  for  inward  and  outward  Griefej  and 
Wounds,  is  accounted  Angular  good  in  Wounds, Bruiles 
Bruifes,  or  the  like,  the  Decoftion  to  be  drunk,  or 
boyled  into  an  Oyntment  or  Oyl,  as  a.  Balfom 
or  Balm,  and  fo  it  isfingular  good  againft 
BroJien  Bruifes,  and  Bones  broken  or  out  of  joyntjand 
Bones,  giveth  mucheafto  the  Chollick,  and  Splene- 
Chollicl(,  tick  Difeafts  5  as  alfb  for  Ruptures,  or  bur- 
Splcen,  ftings.  The  Decodion  of  the  Root  in  white 
Ruptures j  Wine  provokes  Urine  exceedingly  and  clen- 
Dificry.  feth  the  Bladder  and  paflages  of  Urine. 


Featherfew. 

TDefcvipUon, 

Common  Featherfew  hath  many  large 
freft  green  Leavs  very  much  torn  or  cut 
on  the  edges  :  The  Stalks  are  hard  and  round 
fet  with  many  fuch  like  Leavs,  but  fomwhat 
fmaller,  and  at  the  tops  ftand  many  fingle 
Flowers  upon  feveral  final  Footftalks,  confi- 
fting  of  many  final  white  Leavs  ,  ftanding 
round  about  a  yellow  thrum  in  the ‘middle. 

The  Root  is  fomwhat  hard  and  fhort,  with 
many  ftrflng  Fibres  at  it:  The  feent  of  the 
whol  Plant  is  very  ftrong,  and  fluffing,  and 
the  tail  very  bitter. 

Tlace, 

This  groweib  wild  in  fome  places  of  this 
Land  j  but  it  is  for  the  moll  part  nourilhed  in 
Gardens. 

Time. 

It  Flowreth  in  the  Months  oijune  vaAJur 
ly. 

Venues  and,  'Vfe. 

It  is  chiefly  ufed  for  the  Difeafes  of  theMo- 
ther,  whether  it  be  the  ftrangling  or  rifing  of  Mother, 
the  Mother,  Or  Hardnefs  or  Innamatinns  of  womb, 
the  fame,  applied  outwardly  tlkreunto  :  or  zTerms, 
Decoftion  of  the  Flowers  in  Wine  with  a  lit-  provolies,  ] 
tie  Nutmeg  or  Mace  put  therin>  and  drunk 
ten  in  a  day,&  is  an  approvedRemedy  to  bring 
down  Womens  Courfesfpeedily,  and  helpeth  Dead 
to  expel  the  dead  Birth  and  Afterbirth.  For  a  Birth, 
Woman  to  fit  over  the  hot  fumes  of  the  De-  ^fter- 
coition  of  the  Herb  made  in  Water  or  Wine  birth 
is  efieilual  alfo  for  the  fame  5  and  in  fome  * 
cafes  to  apply  the  boyled  Herb  warm  to  the 
privy  parts.  The  Dccoilion  therof  made, 
with  fome  Sugar  or  Honey  put  therto,  is  ufed 
by  many  with  good  fucccfs,to  help  the  Cough, 
and  Huffing  of  the  Cheft  by  cold,  as  alfo  to  Coug^h 
elenfthe  Rein's  and  Bladder, -and  help  to  ex- ^eins^ 
pel  the  Hone  in  them.  The  Pouder  of  the  Bladder 
Herb  taken  in  Wine,  with  fome  Oximel  pur-  choUer  * 
geth  both  Choller  and  Flegm,  and  is  available  ^ 
for  thofe  that  are  Ihort  winded  >  and  arc  trou-  Mdati- 
bled  with  M'elancholly  and  Heavinefs  or  fad-  choUy 
nefsof  the  Spirits.  It  is  very  efieilual  for  all  Sadnef. 
pains  in  the  Head  coming  of  a  cold  cavif,  the 
Herb  being  bruifed,  and  applied  to  the  crown  ucadach 
of  the  Head i  as  alfo  for  a  Vertigo,  that  ^ 

is  a  turning  or  fwimming  in  the  Head.  The  ^ 

Decoftion  therof  drunk  warm,  and  the  Herb 
bruifed  with  a  few  Corns  of  Bay  Salt  and  ap¬ 
plied  to  the  Wrifts  before  the  coming  of  the  Jgue, 

Ague  Fits, doth  take  them  away.  The  diftillcd  Defer mety 
Water  taketh  awayFrccklcs5&  other  Spots  and  of  the  sl(m 
Deformities  in  the  Face.  The  Herb  bruifed 
and  heated  on  a  Tyle,  with  fome  Wine  to 
moiften  it,,  of- fried  with  a  little  Wine  and  . 

Oyl  in  a  frying  Pan,  and  applied  warm  out-  ^^nd, 

wardly 


The  Ettglijh  Thyjitian, 


Choll'ic^i  vvardly  to  the'*placeS}*  hclpcth  the  wind  and 
Obium»  Chollick  in  the  lower  part  of  the  Belly  r  It  is 
an  elpecial  Remedy  againft  Opium  taken  too 
liberally. 

Venus  commands  the  Herb  and  hath  com¬ 
manded  ittofuccour  her  Sifters  [fVofneftl  and 
to  be  a  general  ftrengthner  of  their  Wombs 
and  remedy  fuch  infirmities^  as  a  carelefs  Mid¬ 
wife  hath  there  cauled,  if  they  will  be  but  plea- 
fed  to  make  ufe  of 'her  Herb  boyled  in  white 
Wine, and  drink  the  Decodionjit  clenfeth  the 
Womb ,  expelleth  the  Afterbirth,  doth  the 
Woman  all  the  good  (he  can  defire  of  anHerb. 
And  if  any  grumble  becauf  they  cannot  get  the 
Herb  in  Winter,  tell  them  if  they  pleai  they 
may  make  a  Syrup  of  it  in  Summer. 

Fennel. 


Wind, 

Difury, 

Stone, 


Every  Garden  affordeth  this  fo  plentifullyj 
that  it  needeth  no  Defeription. 

Venues  and  Vje» 

Fennel  is  good  to  break  wind^  to  provoke 
Urine,  and  eafthe  pains  of  the  Stone,  and 
Encrea-  help  to  break  it.  The  Lcavs  or  Seed  boiled  in 
feth  Milk,  Barley  Water  and  drunk  is  good  for  Nurlesto 
Amends  encreafthei  r  Milk  and  make  it  more  wholfom 
for  the  Child :  The  Leavs ,  or  rather  the 
HicTouih,  Seedboylcd  in  Water  ftaieth  the  Hiccough, 
Loathing  ^’^d  taketh  away  that  loathing  which  often¬ 
times  hapneth  to  the  Stomachs  of  Sick,  and 
Yeaverifh  Perfons,  and  allayeth  the  heat  ther- 
of.  The  Seedboylcd  in  Wine  anddrtmk,  is 

good  for  thofe  that  are  bitten  by  Serpents,  or 

^Muthroms  have  eaten  Poyfon  full  Herbs  or  Muftrroms : 
Ob(truBi-  The  Seed  and  the  Root  much  more  hclpeth 
in  the  to  op^ti  Obftruftions  of  the  Liver,  Spleen, 
and  Gall,  and  thereby  helpeth  she  painful  and 
windy  fwcllings  of ' the  Spleen,  and  the  yel¬ 
low  Jaundice,  as  alfo  the  Gout  and  Cramps; 
The  Seed  is  of  good  ufe  in  Medicines  to  help 
Jaundice,  Ihortnefs  of  breath ,  and  Wheefing  by 
Gout,  flopping  of  the  Lungs.  It  helpeth  alfo 
Cramp,  to  bring  down  the  Courfes  and  to  elenf  the 
wheefing,  P^tts  after  delivery.  The  Roots  are  of  moft 
Terms  tife  in  Phyfick  Drinks  and  Broths  that  are  ta- 
provokes,  ken  to  elenf  the  Blood,  to  open  Obftrudlions 
After  De-  of  the  Liver  to  provoke  Urine,  and  amend 
livery,  the  ill  colour  in  the  Pace  after  Sicknefs,  and 
elenf,  to  cauf  a  good  habit  through  the  Body  :  Both 
open,  Leavs,  Seeds,  and  Roots  hereof  arc  much  ufed 
Fatncfi,  in  Drinks  or  Broths,  to  make  people  more 
fparc  and  lean  that  are  too  fat  ’  The  diftilled 
Water  of  the  whol  Herb  or  the  condenlate 
juyee  dilTolved,  but  cfpecially  the  Natural 
juyee  that  in  hot  Countries  ilfueth  out  there¬ 
of  of  its  own  accord,  dropped  into  the  Eyes, 
clenfeth  them  from  mifts  and  films  that  hin¬ 
der  the  fight.'  The  fweet  Fennel  is  much  wea¬ 
ker  in  Phyfical  ufes,  than  the  common  FenneL 


The  wild  Fennel  is  ftronger  and  hotter  than 
the  tame  j  and  thcrforc  moft  powerful  againft 
the  Stoncjbutnot  fo  effeftual  toencrcafMilk, 
becauf  of  its  drinefs. 

One  good  old  fafhion  is  not  yet  quite  left 
off,  vi\.  To  boil  Fennel  with  Fifti,  for  it 
eonfumes  that  Flegmatick  humor  which.  Fifti 
moft  plentifully  afford  and  annoy  the  body  by, 
therf ore  it  is  a  moft 'fit  Herb  for  that  pur- 
pofe  though  few  that  ufe  it  know  why  or  wher- 
fore  they  do  it,  I  fupoofe  the  Reafon  of  its  be¬ 
nefit  this  way  is  becauf  it  is  an  Herb  qf  eMer- 
cury  aud  under  Virgo,  and  therfore  bears  An¬ 
tipathy  to  Vi  fees.  Dill  is  alfo  an  Herb  of 
Mercury,  which  I  forgot  to  certifie  you  of  be¬ 
fore. 

Sow*FenneI,or  Hogs** 
FenneL 


ef  meat, 

Venemous 
Seafis, 
Poyfon, 


ons' 
liver. 
Spleen, 
and  Call, 
Fellow 


Eyes. 


Deferiptim. 

THe  common  Sow-Fennel  hath  diverf 
branched  Stalks  of  thick  and  fomwhat 
long  Leavs,  three  for  the  moft  part  joyned 
together  at  a  place,  among  which  rifeth  a  cre- 
fted  ftrait  Stalk,  lefs  than  Fennel  with  fome 
Joynts  tberon,  and  Leavs  growing  thereat^ 
and  toward  the  top  fome  Branches  iffuing 
from  thence,  likewife  on  the  tops  of  the  Stalk 
and  Branches  ftand  diverf  tufts  of  yelloW  Flo¬ 
wers,  where  after  grow  fomwhat  flat,  thin, 
and  yellowifh  Seed  bigger  than  Fennel  Seeds 
The  Root  groweth  great  and  deep  with  many 
other  parts  and  Fibres  about  them,  of  a  ftrong 
feent  like  hot  Brimftone  and  yielding  forth  s 
yellowifh  Milk,  or  clammy  Juyee  almoft  like  3 
Gum; 

Place. 

It  groweth  plentifully  in  the  Salt  low  Mai'- 
fhes  neer  by  Feaverfham  in 
time. 

It  Flowreth  and  feedeth  in  July  and 
gufi. 

Venues  and  vfe. 

Thtjnyct  oi  Sow-Fennel  (faith  Diofeori-  tethxrgy, 
dcs  and  Galen)  ufed  with  Vinegar  and  Rofe-  Frenjie,  j 
water,  or  the  Juyee  with  j  little  P\sphothivxs\  Vertigo, 
puttotheNofe,  helpeth  thofe  that  are  trou-  Falling- 
bled  with  the  Lethargy,  the  Frenfie,  the  tur-  Sickuefi, 
ning  or  Giddinefs  of  the  Head,  the  Falling-  Headacb) 
Sicknefs,  long  and  inveterate  Headach,  the  Palfcy, 
Palfie,  Sciatica,  and  the  Cramp,  and  general-  Sciatica, 
ly  all  the  Difeafes  of  the  Sinews^  ufed  with  Cramp, 
Oyland  Vinegar.  The  Juyee  diffolved  in.  Sinews, 
Wine,  or  put  into  an  Eg ,  is  good  fo'-'  the  Dr  amp. 
Cough,  or  fhortnefs  of  Breath  and  for  thole  jhai  tnefi 
that  are  troubled  with  the  Wind  in  the  Body  j  of  breathy 
It  purgeth  the  Belly  gently,  helpeth  the  hard-  wind, 
nefs  of  the  Spleen,  giveth  caf  to  Women  that  Spleen, 

Q  z  .  have 


childbirth  have  fore  travail  in  Childbirth,  and  eafcth  the 
Reinsy  pains  of  the  Reins  and  Bladder,  and  alfo  of 

Bladdery  the  Womb.  A  little  of  the  Juyce  diflolved  in 
tvomby  Wine  and  dropped  into  the  Ears,  eafeth  much 
Earsy  of  the  pains  in  them ;  and  put  into  an  hollow 
Hollow  Tooth,  eafeth  the  pain  therof.  The  Root  is 
Teethy  lefs  effedual  in  all  the  aforefaid  Difeafes :  yet 
Ulcer Sy  thePouder  oftheRoot  clenfeth  foul  Ulceri 
brokfi^i  being  put  into  them  j  and  taketh  out  Splin- 
Bonesy  ters  ofbroken  Bones  or  other  things  in  the 
Tbornsy  Fleih  and  healeth  them  up  perfectly ,  as 
Womd^.  alfo  ft  drycth  up  old  and  inveterate  running 
Sores,  and  is  of  admirable  Vertue  in  all  green 
Wounds. 


Figwort^  or  Throat- 
wort. 


Defcription- 

THe  common  great  Fi^TVort  fendeth  forth 
divcrf  great,  ftrong,  hard,  fquare,  brown 
Stalksthree  or  four  Foot  high,  wherin  grow 
large,  hard,  and  dark  green  Leavs,  two  at  a 
Joynt,  which  are  larger  and  harder  than  Net¬ 
tle  Leavs,  but  not  Hinging :  At  the  tops 
of  the  Stalks  Hand  many  purple  Blowers  fet  in 
Husks,  which  arc  fomwhat  gaping  and  open, 
fomwhat  like  thofe  ofWiter-Betony  j  after 
which  come  hard  round  Heads,  with  a  fmall 
point  in  the  middle,  wherin  lie  fmall  brow- 
nifh  Seed.  The  Root  is  great,  white,  and 
thick,  with  mtmy  branches  at  it  growing  a- 
flope  under  the  upper  cruft  of  the  Ground, 
which  abideth  many  yeers  but  keepeth  not  his 
green  Leavs  in  Winter. 

Place. . 

It  groweth  frequently  in  moift  and  ftiadowy 
Woods,  and  in  the  lower  parts  of  Fields  and 
Meadows. 

Time. 

It  Flowreth  about  Julyy  and  the  Seed  will 
be  ripe  about  a  Month  after  the  Flowers  are 
fallen. 

Venues  and  life. 

The  Decbftion  uf  the  Herb  taken  inward¬ 
ly,  and  the  bruifed  Herb  applied  outwardly. 
Congealed,  diflblveth  clotted  or  congealed  Blood  within 
Blood  the  Body,  coming  by  any  Wound,  Bruif,  or 
by  Woundy  Fall  j  and  is  no  lefs  effectual  for  the  Kings  E- 
Bruifey  or  vil,  or  any  other  Knots,  Kernels,  Bunches  or 
Tally  Wens  growing  in  the  Flefti  wherfoever,  and 
lyings  £-  for  the  Hemorrhoids  or  Piles,  or  other 
•vily  Wensy  Knobs  or  Kernels  which  fomtimes  grow  a- 
Hemor-  bout  the  Fundament:  An  Oyntment  made 
rhoidsy  hereof,  may  be  ufed  at  all  times  when  the 

Fimda-  frefh  Herb  is  not  to  be  had.  The  diftilled 

menty  Water  of  the  whol  Plant,  Roots  and  all  is  ufed 
for  the  fame  purpofes,  and  drieth  up  the  fu- 
perfluous  virulent  moifture  of  hollow  and  cor¬ 


roding  Ulcers  j  It  taketh"  away  all  rcdnels,  Ulcersy 
Spots  and  Freckles  in  the  Face,  as  alfo  the  Scurfy 
Scurff  or  any  foul  Deformity  therin,  and  the  Spots, 
Leprofic  likewife.  FreclileSy 

Some  Latin  Authors  call  it  Cervicria  be.  Deformity y 
cauf  ’tis  aprdpriated  to  the  Neck  ,  and  we  Leprofie. 
Throatwort  becauf  ’tis  apropriated  to  the 
Throat  :  Venus  owns  the  Herb,  and  the 
Cceleftial  Bull  will  not  deny  it,  therefore  a 
better  Remedy  cannot  be  for  the  Kings  Evil, 
becauftheikfoow  that  rules  the  Difeaf  is  exal¬ 
ted  there,  nor  for  any  Difeafin  the  Neck,  the 
reft  of  the  Difeafes  fpecified,  you  may  if  you 
look  fee  a  very  good  reafon  for  their  cure  by 
this  Herb. 

Filipeiidula^  or  Drop- 
wort. 

Defeription. 

'^His  fendeth  forth  many  Leavs  fome  big- 
ger,  fome  leflcr,  fet  on  each  fide  of  a  mid¬ 
dle  Rib,  and  each  of  them  dented  about  the 
edges,  fomwhat  refembling  wild  Tanfie,  or 
raiher  Agrimony,  but  harder  in  handling,  a- 
mong  which  rifeth  up  one  or  more  Stalks  two. 
or  three  Foot  high,  with  like  Leavs  growing 
theron,  and  fomtimes  alfo  divided  into  other 
Branches  Ipreading  at  the  top  into  many  white 
fweet  fmclling  Flowers ,  confifting  of  five 
Leavs  apiece  with  fome  threds  in  the  middle 
of  them  Handing  together  in  a  tuft  or  Umbel 
each  upon  a  fmi  Footftalk,  which  after  they 
have  been  open  and  blown  a  good  while  do 
fall  away,  and  in  their  places  appear  final, 
round  chaffy  heads  like  Buttons  wherein  are 
the  chaffy  Seed  fet  and  placed.  The  Root  con- 
fifts  of  many  final  black  tuberous  pieces,  faft- 
ned  together  by  many  final  long  blackilh 
Strings  which  run  from  one  to  another. 

Place. 

It  groweth  in  many  places  of  this  Land,  in 
the  Corners  of  dry  Fields  and  Meadows,  and 
their  Hedg  Sides. 

Time. 

They  Flower  in  June  and  Julyy  and  their  • 

Seed  is  ripe  in  ^ugu(t. 

Venues  and  vfc.  _  '  > 

It  is  very  effedlual  to  open  the  pafl'ages  of 
the  Urine,  and  help  the  Strangury,  and  all  o-  jylfuryj 
ther  pains  of  the  Bladder  and  Reins,  helping  stranguryj 
mightily  to  expel  the  Stone  in  the  Kidnies  or  ]{einsy 
Bladder,  and  the  Gravel  alfo,  and  thefe  are  Bladder, 
done  by  taking  the.  Roots  in  Pouder,  or  a  Stone, 
Dccodtionofthem.  in  white  Wine,  whercun-  Gravel, 
tea  little  Honey  is  added:  The  fame  alfo 
helpeth  to  expel  the  Afterbirth.  The  Roots 
made  into  Pouder  and  mixed  with  Honey  in¬ 
to  the  form  of  an  Eleduary  doth  much  help 

them 


Tl}e  EngUp>  Thyjltiani 


53 


them  whofe  Stomachs  are  fwollen,  diflolving 
J-J’iTjd,  and  breaking  the  Wind  which  was  the  cau^ 
Lungs )  therof,  and  is  alfo  vcryefFedual  foralldifea- 
jvbeifingi  fes  of  the  Lungs,  as  fhortncfs  of  breath, 
hoarcem(i  wheelings,  hoarfhefs  of  the  Throat,  and  the 
Coh'gb^  Cough,  and  to  expeftorate  cold  Flegm,  or  a- 
I'lcgni .  ny  other  parts  thereabouts. 

It  is  called  TiropvfQrt  becauf  it  helps  fuch  as 
pifs  by  drops. 

The  Y  ellow  Water-Flag, 

0  K, 

Flower-de-Iuce. 

Defcription. 

THis  groweth  Hire  the  Flower-de-luces, 
but  it  hath  much  longer,  and  narrower 
.  fad  green  Leavs  joyned  together  in  that  falhi- 

on  3  the  Stalk  alio  groweth  oftentimes  as  high, 
bearing  fmal  yellow  Flowers,  lhaped  like  the 
Flower-de-luce  with  three  falling  Leavs,  and 
other  three  arched  that  cover  their  Bottoms ; 
but  inftead  of  the  three  upright  Leavs  as  the 
Flower-de-luce  hath ,  this  hath  only,  three 
Ihort  pieces  Handing  in  ,  their  places,  after 
which  fucceed  thick  and  long  three  fquare 
Heads  containing  in  eacTi  part  fomwhat  big 
and  Flat  Seed  like  to  thofe  of  the  Flower-de- 
luces  :  The  Root  is  long  and  flendcf-,  of  a 
pale  brownilh  colour  on  the  outfide,  and  of  a 
Hore  flelh  colour  on  the  inner  fidcjwith  many 
hard  fibres  thereat,  and  very  harlh  in  taft. 
Place. 

It,  iifually  groweth  in  watery  Ditches, 
Ponds,  Lakes,  and  More  fidcs  which  arc  al- 
waics  overflown  with  water. 

Time. 

Itflowrethin  /«/y,  and  the  Seed  is  ripe  in 
August. 

Venues  and  ufe. 

The  Root  of  this  Water-Flag  is  very  aftrin- 
BindSj  gent,  cooling,  and  drying,  and  therby  heipcth 
Cools,  il  Lasks  and  Fluxes,  whether  of  Blood  or 
Vries,  Humors,  as  bleeding  at  Mouth,  Nofe,  oro- 
Flux,  thcr  parts,  bloody  Fluxes,  and  the  immode- 
Bloodyflux  rate  Flux  ofWomens  Courfes.  The  dillillcd 
Bleeding,  water  of  the  whol  Herb,  Flowers,  and  Roots 
Terms  is  a  Soveraign  good  Remedy  for  watering 
flops.  Eyes,  both  to  be  dropped  into  them,  and  to 
Syes,  have  Cloathes  or  Spunges  wetted  therin  and 
Spots,  applied  to  the  Forehead  j  It  alfo  hclpeththe 
B/f  wipes.  Spots  or  Blemilhes  that  happen  in  or  about 
Inflamati-  the  Eyes,  or  in  any  other  parts :  The  faid  wa- 
oiis ,  S  ore  ter  fomented  on  Swcllings'and  hot  Inflamati- 
Breafls,  ons  of  Womens  fare  Breafts,  upon  Cankers 
Caniicrs,  alfo,  and  thofe  fpreading  Ulcers  called  Noli 
Z’li  crs,  we  r^MgC'/'c,  doth  much  good  3  Ithelpethal- 
N oil  me  fo  foul  Ulcers  in  the  privy  parts  of  man  or 
tangt're.  woman,  or  elfwherc.  AnOyntment  madeof 


the  Flowers  is  better  for  thefe  external  appli¬ 
cations.  , 

.  Take  notice  that  the  rules  the  Plant 

and  then  I  have  done. 

Flaxweed^  or  Toadflax. 

Vefeription. 

OUr  common  Flaxweed  hath  diverf 
Stalks  full  fraught  with  long  and  nar¬ 
row  blue  or  Alh-colour’d  Leavs,  and  from  the 
middle  of  tbcni  almoft  upward  florcd  with  3 
number  of  pale  yellow  Flowers,  of  a  ftrong 
unpleafantfeent,  with  deeper  yellow  mouths, 
and  blackilh  flat  Seeds  in  round  Heads.  The 
Root  is  foinwfiat  woody  and  white,  efpecially 
the  maih  downright  one,  with  many  fibres,  a- 
biding  many  yeers,  fhooting  forth  Roots  c- 
very  way  round  aTaOut,  and  new  Branches  c- 
very  yecr. 

Tiace. 

This  groweth  throughout  this  Land,  both 
by  the  way  fides  in  Meadows,  as  alfo  by  Hedg 
fides,  and  upon  the  Tides  of  Banks  and  Bor¬ 
ders  of  Fields. 

Time. 

It  Flowreth  in  Summer,and  the  Seed  is  ripe 
ufually  before  the  end  of  AUgufl. 

Venues  and  Ufe. 

This  is  frequently  ufed  to  provoke  llrins 
being  flopped,  and  to  fpend  the  abundance  of 
mofe  watery  Humors  by  Urine  which  caufthe 
Dropfie.  The  Decoftion  of  the  Herb  both 
Leavs  knd  Flowers  in  Wine,  taken  and  drunk 
doth  fomwhat  move  the<Belly  downwards,  o- 
peneth  ObArudionsof  the  Liver,ajnd  heipcth 
the  yellow  Jaundice,  cxpelleth  Poyfon,  pro- 
voketh  Womens  Courfes,,  driveth  forth  the 
dead  Child,  and  Afterbirth.  The  Diflilled 
water  of  the  Herb  and  Flowers  is  efleftual  for 
all  the  fame  purpofes,  efpecially  being  drunk 
with  a  dram  of  the  Ponder  of  the  Seeds,  or 
Bark  of  the  Root  of  Walwort  and  a  little 
Cinnamon  for  certain  daies  together,  is  held 
a  Angular  Remedy  for  the  Dropfie  ;  The 
juyee  of  the  Herb  or  the  diflilled  Wjtcr  drop¬ 
ped  into  the  Eyes  is  a  certain  Remedy  for 
all  heat,  Inflamations  and  rednefs  in  them. 
The  Juyee  or.  water  put  into  foul  Ulcers  whi- 
ther  iney  be  Cancrous  or  FiltuloiiSj  with 
tents  fouled  therin,  or  the  parts  walhcd  or  in- 
jeaedtherwithclenfeththcm  throughly  from 
the  bottom,  and  healeth  them  up  fakly.  The 
fame  Juyee  or  Water  alfo  clcnleth  the  Skin 
wonderfully  of  all  forts  of  deformity  thereof^' 
as  Lepry,  Morphew,  Scurff,  Wheals,  Pim¬ 
ples,  or  any  other  Spots  or  Marks  in  the  Skin, 
applied  of  it  felf,  or  uled  with  ibme  Pouder  of 
Lupines. 

Mars  owns  the  Herb,  in  Suffex  vit  call  it 
^  GaU>. 


Difury, 

Dropfie, 

Ob^rudti-^ 

m  of  the 

Laver, 

yellow 

jemdice, 

DeadChtid 

and 

Afterbirth 

Inflamati^ 

mesJE-yes, 

ulcers. 

Cancers^ 

Fiflulaesa 

Leprofie,  j 

Scabs, 

Pimples, 

Freckle^a 


-;l 


Vf  :  irt‘i  1 

♦l 


Call-worti  and  lay  it  in  our  [Chickens  wa¬ 
ter,  to  cure  them  of  the  Gall  I  think,  I  am 
fure  it  relecvs  them  when  they  are  drooping. 

Fkawort. 

T>efcviftion. 

THe  ordinary  Tleawort  rifeth  up  with  a 
Stalk  two  Foot  high,  or  more,  full  qf 
Joynts  and  Branches  or^  every  fide  up  to  the 
lop,  andatevery  Joynt  two  fmall  long  and 
narrow  whitifli  green  Leavs  fomwhat  hairy  : 
At  the  tops  of  every  Branch  Hand  diverf  fmall 
Ihort  fcaly  or  chaffy  Heads,  out  of  which 
come  forth  fmall  whitifti  yellow  threds,  like 
to  thofe  of  the  Plantane  Herbs ,  which  are  the 
Bloomings  or  Flowers.  The  Seed  ihclofed  in 
thofe  Heads  is  fmal  and  fhining  while  it  is 
Frefh  very  like  unto  Fleas,  both  for  colour 
and  bignefs,  but  turning  black  when  it  grow- 
eth  old.  The  Root*  is  not  long  but  white, 
hard,  and  woody,  perifhing  every  yeer  and 
riling  again  of  its  own  Seed  for  diverf  yeers  if 
it  be  fuft'red  to  ftied  :  The  whol  Plant  is  fom¬ 
what  whitilh  and  hairy,  fmclling  fomwhat  like 

Roiin*  ^  ,  rr  ■ 

There  is  another  fort  hereof  differing  not 
from  the  former  in  the  manner  of  growing, 
but  only  that  his  Stalk  and  Branches  being 
fomwhat  greater  do  a  little  more  bow  down  to 
the  ground  :  The  Leavs  arc  fomwhat  larger  j 
the  Heads  fomwhat  leffer ,  the  Seed  alike  j 
and  the  Root  and  Leavs  abide  all  the  Winter, 
and  perilh  not  as  the  former.  | 

Vlace. 

The  firft  groweth  only  in  Gardens,  the  fe- 
cond;  plentifully  in  Fields  that  are  neer  the 

Sea.  .  f 

•  Time-  I 

They  Flower  in  July,  or  thereabouts.  I 

Venues  and  ufe^ 

The  Seed  fried  and  fo  taken  ftaieth  the  Flux 
.  or  Lask  of  the  Belly,  and  the  con  ofions  that 

ChoUe'fick^  come  by  reafon  of  hot,  Chollerick,  Sharp, and 
Humo'fSj  malignant  Humors  or  by  the  too  much  pur- 
^  \  ging  of  any  violent  jMedicine,  as  Scammony 

'  or  the  like.  The  Muccilage  of  the  Seed  made 

with  Rofe  Water,  and  a  little  Sugar  Candy 
put  therto  is  very  good  in  all  hot' Agues  and 

- - j  burning  Feavers,  and  other  Inflamations  to 

Jnfiamati-  cool  the  thirft  ,  and  lenify  the  drynefs  and 
ensThiyft,  roughnefs  of  the  Tongue  and  Throat.  Ithel- 
Hoarcene^  peth  alio  hoarfnefs  of  the  voice,  and  Difeafes 
Salt  Hu-  oftheBreaft  and  Lungs  caufed  by  hear,  or 
mors,  fharp  fait  humors,  and  the  Plurefic  alfo.  T  he 
Tleurefie,  Muccilage  of  the  Seed  made  in  Plantane  Wa¬ 
ter,  whereunto  the  Yolk  of  an  Egg  or  two, and 
a  little  Populeon  is  put,  is  a  moft  lafe  and  fure 
Remedy  to  eafthe  (haipnefs,  prickings,  and 


Tlux,  Cor 
rofion. 


Agues, 

leavers, 


pains  of  the  Hemonhoids  or  Piles,  if  it  heHcmor- 
iaid  on  a  death  and  bound  therto.  It  helpeth 
alfo  all  Inflamations, in  any  parts  of  the  Body  Headachy 
and  the  pains  that  come  thereby,  as  the  Head-  Mcgrm, 
ach  and  Megrim,  and  all  hot  Im.poflhumes  or  Apaflums, 
Swellings,  or  breakings  cut  of  the  Skin,  as  HlainSy  ~ 
Blains,  Wheals,  Puflies,  Purples,  and  the  like;  B  heals^ 
as  alfo  the  pains  of  the  Joynts,  and  ofthokTjjhcs,]' 
that  are  out  of  joynt  j  the  pains  of  the  GoutP/np/es, 
and  Sciatica,,  the  Burfling  of  yeng  Children,  Gout, 
and  the  fwelling  of  the  Navd,  applied  with  Joyttts, 
OylofRofes  and  Vinegar.  It  is  alfo  xety  Sciatica, 
good  to  heal  the  Nipples  and  Sore  Bicafls  of 'Ripples, 
Women  being  often  applied  thereunto.  The  Sore 
juyee  of  the  Herb  with  a  little  Honey  put  in-  Breafts, 
to  the  Ears  helpeth  tfle  running  of  them,  and  Ea'rs, 
the  Worms  breeding  in  them  :  The  fame  al-  Worms, 
fo  mixed  with  Hogs  Greaf,  and  applied  to 
corrupt  and  filthy  Ulcers  and  Sores,  clenfeth  Ulcers, 
and  healeth  them. 

The  Herb  is  cold  and  dry.  Saturnine,  I 
fuppofe  it  obtained  the  name  Flearvort  becauf 
the  Seeds  are  fo  like  Fleas. 

4?  ^  ^ ^  •  •I’ 4*  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^ 

Flixweed. 

Vefeription. 

THis  rifeth  up  with  a  round  upright  hard 
Stalk  four  or  five  Foot  high,  fpread  into 
fundry  Branches,  wheron  grow  many  grayifh 
green  Leavs  very  finely  cut  and  fevered  into  a 
number  of  ftiort  and  almoft  round  parts.  The 
Flowers  are  very  fmal  and  yellow  growing 
Spike  fafhion,  after  which  come  very  fmal, 
long  Pods,  with  very  fmal  ycllowifh  Seed  in 
them.  The  Root  is  long  and  woody  perifliing 
every  yeer. 

There  is  another  fort  differing  in  nothing 
fave  only  it  hath  fomwhat  broader  Leaves : 

They  have  a  flrong  evil  favor  being  fmelt  un¬ 
to,  and  are  of  a  drying  taft. 

VI  ace. 

They  grow  wild  in  the  Fields  byHedg- 
fides,  and  High-waies,  and  among  rubbilh, 
and  in  many  other  places. 

Time. 

They  Flower  and  Seed  quickly  after,  name¬ 
ly  in  June  and  July, 

Venues  and  Ufe. 

Both  the  Herb  and  SceA  of  Flixweed  isofF/^^^, 
excellent  ufe  to  flay  the  Flux  or  Lask  of  the  Bleeding, 
Belly  being  drunk  in  Water  wherein  gads  of  Bloody 
Steel  heated  have  been  often  quenched;  zn^^lux, 
isnolefs  efledtual  for  the  laid  purpofc  thzvt'^^'^ms 
Plantane  or  Cemfry,  and  to  reltrain  any  c-  Ijops, 
ther  Flux  of  Blood  in  man  or  Woman,  as  zl- broken 
fo  to  confolidate  Bones  broken  or  cut  of  Bones, 
Joynt.  The  Juyee  therof  drunk  in  Wine,  oxMerobcis 
the  Deception  of  the  Heib  drunk,  doth  kill  disjoynud- 
thcWoimsin  the  Stcm^ach  or  Belly,  of  the 

W  orms 


The  Eiiglljh  Thyjltian, 


55 


■n-oYKS,  Woims  that  grew  in  n 

Sons,  And  made  into  a  Salve  c'.oth  quick  y 

Ulurs.  old  fores,  how  foul  or  Malignam  foever  they 

be.  The  diftilled  water  of  the  Herb  worketh 

the  fame  eft'eas  although  femwhat  weaker,  yet 
is  a  fair  Medicine,  and  more  acceptable  to  be 

called  Tfaroced.  becauf  it  cures  the 
Plux,  and  for  its  uniting  ’broken  Bones,  &c. 
VaraceUm  extols  it  to  the  Skks.  It  is^  fitting 
Syrups,  Oyntments,  and  Plaifiers  of  it  were 
kept  in  your  HoufeS. 

Flower-de-luce. 


Stomach, 

F/egm, 

ChoUcr, 

Ja  undice, 
Vroffic, 

Belly, 

Sides, 

Agues, 

Lt*Vt  *  y 

Spleen, 

Stones, 

Ccmulji- 

on.  Cramp, 

Venemotes 

Beafts, 

Vi  fury, 

Chollick, 

Fermspo- 

zol^es, 

Cough, 


Sneejing, 

Hemor¬ 

rhoids, 

Foothach, 


•Defeription. 

THis  is  fo  well  known,  being  nurfed  up  m 

Hioft  Gardehs,  that  I  ftiall  not  need  to 

fpend  time  in  writing  a  Defcriptionthereo  . 

Ti/wc.  „ 

The  Flaggy  kinds  thereof  have  the  moil 
PhyficalufeTs  the  Dwarf  kinds  thereof  flo¬ 
wer  in  April,  the  greater  forts  rn^^y. 

Verms  and  z>}e. 

"the  Tuyee  or  Decoaion  of  the  green 

Roots  of  the  Flaggy  kind  of 
with  a  littlfe  Honey  drunk,  doth  purge  and 
elenfthe  Stomach  of  grofs  and  tough  Flegm 
andChollertherin,  Ithelpeth  the  Jaundice 
and  the  Dropfie-  by  evacuating  there  h^ 
both  upwards  and  downwards,  and  becauf  it 
fomwhat  hurteth  the  Stomach,  is  not  to  be  ta¬ 
ken  but  with  Honey  ond  Spicknaid.  The 
fame  being  drunk  doth  eafthe  pains  and  toi- 
mentsofthe  Belly  and  Sides,  the  fhaking  of 

Agues,  the  Difeafes  of  the  Liver  and  Spleen, 
the  Worms  in  the  Belly,  the  Stone  inthe 

Reins,  Convulficns  or  Cramps  that  come  o 
cold  Humors ,  it  alfo  helpeth  thofe  whofe 
Seed  paffeth  from  them  unawars  It  is  a  Ke- 
niedy  againft  the  bitings  and  ftingin|s  of  ve- 
nemous  Creatures  being  boyled  in  Wate^nd 
Vineger  and  drunk :  Being  boyled  in  ine 
and  drunk  it  proveketh  Urine,  helpeth  the 
Chollick,  bringeth  down  Womens  Courles  j 
and  made  up  into  a  Peflai7  with  Honey,  and 
put  up  into  the  Body,  draweth  forth  the  dead 
Child.  It  is  much  commended  againit  the 
Cough  to  expedorate  tough  Flengm  i  It 
much  eafeth  pains  in  the  Head,  and  procureth 
fleep :  Being  put  Into  the  Noftrils  it  procureth 
Neefing,  and  theiby  purgeth  the  Head  of 
Flegm  ••  The  juyee  of  the  Root  applied  to 
the  Piles  or  Hemorrhoids  giveth  much  eaf. 
TheDecodicnofthe  Roots  gargled  in  the 
Mouth  eafeth  the  Toothach,  and  helpeth  a 
Stinking  breath.  The  Oyl  called  0/ei/w  IH- 
mm  if  it  be  lightly  made  of  the  great  broad 
Flag  FloTvir-dc-luce  (and  not  of  the  gi eat 
Bulbous  blue  Tloycer-dt-litce  as  is  uled  by 

R 


31 

feme  Apothecaries)  and  Roots  of  the  fame  of 
the  Flaggy  kinds  is  very  cffcdual  to  warm  and 
comfort  all  cold  Joynts  and  Sinews,  as  alfo 
the  Gtjut  and  Sciatica^  and  meUifieth,  diffol-  Sineras, 
vethj'and  confumeth  T umors  or  Swellings  in 
any  part  of  the  Body,  as  alfo  of  the  Matrix ;  ociatica. 
It  helpeth  the  Cramp  and  Convulfion  of  the  Womb, 
Sinews ;  The  He3d  and  Temples  anointed  FJoeram, 
thei  with  helpeth  the  Catark  or  thin  Rhewm  Freapt, 
diftilling  from  thence  J  and  ufed  upon  the  Wounds 
Breaft  or  Stomach,  helpeth  to  extenuate  the  lilcers, 
cold  tough  Flegm.  Ithelpeth  alfo  the  pains  Biitulaes^ 
and  noile  in  the  Ears,  and  the  flench  of  the  Candiers^ 
Noftrils.  The  Root  it  fclf  either  green  or  in 
Pouder  helpeth  to  clenf,  heal,  and  incarnate 
Wounds,  and  to  cover  the  naked  Bones  with 

Flefh  again  that  Ulcers  have  made  bare  j  and 

is  alfo  very  good  to  clenf  and  heal  up  Fiftulaes 
and  Cankers  that  are  hard  to  be  cured. 


Fluellin. 


Defeription. 

THis  ftiooteth  forth  many  long  Branches 
partly  lying  upon  the  Ground,  and  part 
{landing  upright,  fet  with  almoft  round  Leavs, 
yet  a  little  pointed,  and  fomtimes  more  long 
than  round,  without  order  theron,  fomwhat 
hoary,  and  of  an  evil  greenifh  white  coloui  j  at 
the  Joynts  all  along  the  Stalks,  and  with  the 
Leavs  come  forth  final  Flowers  one  at  a  place^ 
upoif  a  very  fmall  fhort  Footftalk,  gaping 
fomwhat  like  Snapdragons,  or  rather  like 
Fo  ad  flax,  with  the  upper  Jaw  of  a  yellow  co-- 
lour,  and  the  lower  of  a  Purplifh,  with  a  final 
heel  or  Spur  behind,  after  which  Come  fmall 
round  Heads,  cont.iining  final  black  Seed. 
The  Root  is  final  and  threddy,  dying  every 
yeer,  and  raifeth  it  felf  again  of  its  own  fow- 
ing- 

There  is  another  fort  of  which  hath 

longer  Branches  wholly  trailing  upon  the 
ground  two  or  three  foot  long,  and  fomtimes 
more,  thinner  fet  with  Leavs  theron,  upon 
fmal  Footftalks  •  The  Leaves  are  a  little  lar¬ 
ger  and  fomwhat  round,  and  cornered  fom¬ 
times  in  fome  places  on  the  edges  j  but  the  lo¬ 
wer  part  of  them  being  the  broadeft,  hath  on 
each  fide  a  final  point, making  it  feemas  if  they 
were  Ears,  fomwhat  hairy  but  not  hoary,  and 
of  a  better  green  colour  than  the  former }  The 
Flowers  come  forth  like  the  former,  but  the 
colours  therein  are  more  white  than  yelmw, 
and  the  Purple  not  fo  fair  ;  It  is  a  larger  Flo¬ 
wer,  and  fo  are  the  Seed,  and  Seed  Veffels  ; 
The  Root  is  like  the  other,  and  perilheth  eve¬ 
ry  yeer. 

•  'Flace. 

They  grow  in  diverf  Corn  Fields,  and  in 
borders  abom  them,  and  in  other  ferflo 

grounds. 


The  Englijh  ^hyjitian. 


Grounds ,  about  South  fleet  in  l^ent  abun¬ 
dantly,  at  BHckworth,  Hamertonj  and  Rkh- 
•iverf  worth  in  Huntingtonjhire  j  and  in  divei-r 
-other  places. 

Time. 


They  arc  in  Flower  about  ^une  and  July, 
and  the  whol  Plant  is  dryand  withered  before 
Auguft  be  done. 


Foxglove. 


Bloody 

Flux, 

Terms 

fiops. 


Fertues  and  Vfe. 

The  Leavsbruifed  and  applied  with  Barley 
Evet  >  watering  Eyes  that  are  hot  and  infla- 

J  >  ^  *3  med  by  defluxions  from  the  Head,  doth  very 
much  help  them,  as  alio  the  Fluxes  of  Blood 
or  Humors,  as  the  Lask,  Bloody  Flux,  Wo¬ 
mens  Courfcs,  and  ftaieth  all  manner  of  blee¬ 
ding  atNofe,  Mouth,  or  any  other  place,  or 
that  cometh  by  any  Bruif,  or  Hurt,  or  bur- 
fting.aVcinj  and  wonderfully  it  helpeth  all 
thoie  inward  parts  that  need  confolidating  or 
ftrengthenihg  ;  and  is  no  lefs  effedual  both 
H'ntinde  Wounds,  as  to  clenf  or 

Ulcere  ^  Ulcers,fretting  or  fpreading 

Cankers 

^  ‘  Bees  are  induftrious  and  go  abroad  to  ga¬ 

ther  Honey  from  each  Plant  and  Flower,  but 
Drones  lie  at  home,  and  eat  up’what  the  Bees 
have  taken  pains  for  j  Juft  fo  do  our  C'oUedg 
*>f  Thyfltians,  lie  at  home  and  domineer,  and 
fuck  out  the  Sweetnefs  of  other  Mens  Labors 
and  Studies,  thcmfclvs  being  as  ignorant  in 
the  Knowledg  of  Herbs  as  a  Chfld  of  four 
yeers  old,  as  I  can  make  appear  to  any  Ratio¬ 
nal  man  by  their  laft2)ii^m/<jrflry,  now  then 
to  hide  their  Ignorance,  there  is  not  a  readier 
way  in  the  World,  than  to  hide  Knowledg 
from  theirCountry  mcn,that  fo  noBody  might 
he  able  fo  much  as  to  fmel  out  theirignorance, 
when  Simples  were  more  in  ufc  mens  Bodies 
were  in  better  health  by  far  than  now  they  are, 
or  ftiall  be  if  the  Collcdg  can  help  it.  The 
^  truth  is,  this  Herb  is  of  a  fine  cooling,  drying 
'  quality,  and  an  Oyntment  or  Plailfer  of  it, 
might  do  a  Man  a  courtefie  that  hath  any  hot 
virdent  Sores,  ’tis  admirable  for  the  Ulcers 
of  the  French  Pox,  and  being  a  gallant  An- 
tivenerian  Medicine,  under  the  Jpominion 
of  Saturn,  if  taken  inwardly  may  cure  the  Dif- 
caf.  It  was  at  firft  called  Fcemalc  Speedwel, 
but  a  Shentle  man  of  jvales  whofe  Nofc  was 
almoft  eaten  off  with  the  Pox,  aijd  fo  neer 
the  matter,  that  the  Dofters  commanded  it  to 
be  cut  off,  being  cured  by  only  the  Ufe  of  this 
Herb,  to  honor  the  Herb  for  faying  his  Nofe 
whol,  gave  it  one  of  her  ov\[n  Country  names, 

L  lu  i  L  1  I  N, 


Befcription. 

'T^His  hath  many  long  and  broad  Leavs  ly- 
ing  upon  the  Ground  dented  about  the 
edges,  a  little  foft  or  woolly,  and  of  a  hoary 
green  colour  among  which  rile  up  fomtimes 
Sundry  Stalks,  but  one  very  often  bearing  fuch 
Leavs  thereon  from  the  bottom  to  the  middle, 
fiom  whence  to  the  top  it  is  ftored  with  large 
a^nd  long  hollow  reddilh  Purple  Flowers,  a 
little  more  long  and  eminent  at  the  lower  edg, 
with  fome  white  Spots  within  them, one  above 
another,  with  fmal  green  Leavs  at  everyj  one, 
but  all  of  them  turning  their  Heads  one  way 
and  hanging  downwards,  having  fome  threds 
f  alfointhe  middle,  from  whence  rife  round 
I  Heads  pointed  iharp  at  the  ends,  wherein  fmal 
I  brown  Seed  lictbi  The  Roots  are  many  fmal 
Huskie  Fibresjand  fome  greater  firings  among 
themi  The  Flower  hath  no  feent  j  but  the 
Leavs  have  a  bitter  hot  taft. 

Tlace.  , 

It  groweth  on  the  dry  fandy  Grounds  for  the 
moll  part,  and  as  Well  on  the  higher  as  lower 
^aces  imder  Hedg-fidcs  in  almoft  every 
County  of  this  Land. 

Time. 

It  feldom  Flowreth  before  July,  and  the 
Seed  is  ripe  in  .Augufl. 

Vertues  and  ufe. 

This  Herb  is  familiarly  and  frequently  ufed 
by  the  Italians  to  heal  any  frelh  or  green 
Wound ,  the  Leavs  being  but  bruifed  and  wfAundt 
bound  thereon  j  and  the  juyee  therof  is  alfo  u-  ^ 
fed  in  old  Sores,  to  clenf,  dry,  and  heal  them.  ri.„r  j,.,, 
The  Deco'dion  hereof  made  up  with  fome  Su-  Heal 
gar  or  Honey  is  available  to  clenf  and  purge  ’ 
the  Body,  both  upwards  and  downwards  fom-  nh^ruFti 
times  of  tough  Flegm  and  clammy  hinmoss  of  the" 
and  to  open  Obftrudions  of  the  Liver  and 
Spleen  It  hath  been  found  by  experience  to 
be  available  for  the  Kings  Evil ,  the  Herb  Sn/ffa 
bruifed  and  applied  J  or  an  Oyntment  made  v;«p.c 
with  the  Juyee  thereof  and  fo  ufed  :  And  a  ^ 
Decodion  of  two  handfuls  therof  with  four  vJlinir- 
Ounccs  of  P olipody  in  Ale,  hath  been  found  (jrUneR 
by  late  experience  to  cure  diverf  of  the  Failing-  ^ 

ficknefs,  that  have  been  troubled  with  it  above 
twenty  yeers.  ^  eieaas. 

My  felf  am  confident  that  an  Oyntment  of 
it  is  one  of  the  bell  Remedies  for  a  Scabby 
Head  that  is. 


Fumitory. 


57 


\ 


Tlje  EngliJJy  Thyjttian. 


IXVt’fi 

Spleeiij 

Chol^eVi 

Adu(t 

Melon- 


Fumitory. 

Defciiption^ 

OUr  common  Fumitory  is  a  tender  fappy 
Herb,  fending  forth  from  one  fquarc 
(lender  weak  Stalk  and  leaning  downwards  on 
all  fidcs  many  Branches  two  or  three  foot 
long,  with  finely  cut  and  jagged  Leavs  of  a 
whitilh  or  rather  Blewifh,  Seagreen  colour  : 
At  the  tops  of  the  Branches  ftand  many  O'nall 
Flowers,  as  it  were  in  a  long  fpike  one  above 
another,  made  like  little  Birds  of  a  reddilh 
Purple  colour  with  whitifh  Bellies :  After 
which  come  fmall  round  Husks  containing 
final  black  Seed.  The  Root  is  yellow,  fmalj 
and  not  very  long/ul  of  juyee  while  it  is  green 
But  quickly  perllhing  with  the  ripe  Seed  :  In 
the  Corn  Fields  in  Cornwal  this  beareth  white 
Flowers. 

’Place. 

It  groweth  in  the  Corn  Fields  almoft  CVC17 
where  as  well  as  in  Gardens. 

Time. 

It  Flowrcth  in  <F\lay  for  the  moft  part,  and 
the  Seed  ripeneth  ihortly  after. 

Venues  and  "Vfe. 

The  Juyee  or  Syrup  made  thereof,  or  the 
Dccodtion  made  in  Whey  by  it  felf,  with  fome 
other  purging  or  opening  Herbs  and  Roots  to 
cauf  it  to  work  the  better,  (it  fclf  being  but 
weak)  is  very  cftedlual  for  the  Liver  and 
Spleen,  opening  the  Obftruftions  thereof  and 
clarifying  the  flood  from  Saltilh,  Chollerick, 
and  Adiift  Humors,  which  cauf  Lepry,  Scabs, 
Tetters,  and  Itches,  and  fuch  like  breakings 
out  of  the  Skin,  and  after  the  Purging  doth 


Malned  ftj^engthen  aU  the  inward  parts  j  it  is  good  al- 
¥arzet(ul-^°  againft  the  yellow  Jaundice,  and  Ipendeth 
^  ^  itbyUrin,whichitprocureth  in  abundance. 
Taundscc  Pouder  of  the  dried  Herb  given  for  fome 
yeUofv  &  *  together  curcth  Mclancholly ,  *'"*■ 


blacki 


Syesj 
Hairsj 


.wg . .  ,  but  the 

Seed  is  Itrongeft  in  operation  for  all  the  for¬ 
mer  Difeafes.  The  diftiftilled  Water  of  the 
Herb  is  alfo  of  good  effeft  in  the  former  Dif¬ 
eafes,  and  conduceth  much  againft  the  Plague 
PefUlencCi  and  Peftilence,  being  taken  with  good  Trea¬ 
cle.  The  Diftilled  Water  alfo,  with  a  little 
W'ater  and  Honey  of  Rofes  helpeth  all  the 
Sores  of  the  Mouth  or  Throat,  being  gargled 
often  rherwith.  The  Juyee  dropped' into  the 
Mouth  eJ^'Fyescleareth  the  Sight,  and  taketh  away  red- 
1  hr  oat  other  defeds  in  them,  although  it 

procure  fome  pain  for  the  prefent  and  caufe 
T ears.  Diofcondes  faith  it  hindreth  any  freih 
fpringing  of  hairs  on  the  Eyelids  (after  they 
be  pulled  away)  ft  the  Eyelids  be  anointed 
with  the  Juyee  hereof  with  Gum  ^rabic\  dif- 
lulved  therin.  The  Juyee  of  Fumitory  aud 
Docks  mingled  with  Vinegar,  and  the  places 


gently  waflied  or  wet  therwith,  curcth  all  forts  Scabsy 
of  Scabs,  Pimples,  Itches,  Wheals,  or  Pufties  Itch, 
which  arife  on  the  Face  or  Hands,  or  any  o-  Pimptesy 
ther  part  of  the  Body.  ti'healsy 

Saturn  owns  the  Herb  and  prefents  It  to  the 
World  as  a  Cure  for  his  own  Difeafes,  and  a 
ftrengthner  of  the  parts  of  the  Body  he  rules  : 

If  by  my  -Ajirologicat  of  Difeafes, 

from  the  Decombiture,  you  find  Saturn  Au¬ 
thor  of  the  Difcaf,  or  if  by  T)ire£lion  from  a 
Nativity  you  fear  a  Saturnine  Difeaf  approa¬ 
ching,  you  may  by  this  Herb  prevent  it  in  the 
one,  and  cure  it  in  the  other}  and  therfore 
’tis  fit  you  keep  a  Syrup  of  it  alwaies  by 
yoii. 

The  Furf-Bulh. 

THi^  is  fo  well  tnown,  as  well  by  this 
name ,  as  in  fome  Countries  by  the 
name  Gorf ,  that  t  ftial  not  need  to  write  any 
Defeription  therof ,  my  intent  being  to  teach 
my  Country  men  what  they  know  not,  rather 
than  to  tell  them  again  of  that  which  is  gene¬ 
rally  known  before.  j 

Place. 

They  arc  known  to  grow  on  dry  barren 
Heaths  ,  and  other  waft  gravelly  or  fandy 
grounds  in  all  Countries  of  this  Land. 

Time. 

They  alfo  Flower  in  the  Summer  Months. 

Venues  and  ufe. 

They  are  hot  and  dry  good  to  open  Obftru-  Qb^ru^i- 
dions  of  the  Liver  and  Spleen.  A  Decodi-  onsy 
on  made  with  the  Flowers  therof  hath  been  Liver y 
found  effe dual  againft  the  Jaundice,  as  alfo  SpleeUy 
to  provoke  Urine,  andclcnfthe  Kidneys  froni  Tellorv 
Gravel  or  Stones  ingender’d  in  theni.  Jaundiccj' 

It  is  a  Plant  of  CMarsy  and  doth  all  this  by  Difwry, 
Sympathy.  Gravel, 

Stone. 

^  ^  ^  ■  4?  ^  ^  4*  4*  41*  ^  ^  ^  ^ 


'  1  V 


Garlick. 

'He  offenfivcncs  of  the  breath  of  him  that 
hath  eaten  Garlick  will  Icadc  you  by  the 
Nofe  to  the  knowledg  hereof,  and  (inftead  of 
a  defeription (  direct  you  to  the  place  wher  it  '  “• 
groweth  in  Gardens,  which  kinds  are  the  beft 
and  moft  Phifical. 

Venues  aud  ^fty 

This  was  antiently  accounted  the  PoormanSj  Urine, 
Treacle y  it  bceing  a  remedy  for  all  difeafes  or  Term^ 
hurts  (except  thofe  which  it  felf  breeds)  It  provokes'^ 
provoke.h  Urine  and  womens  Courfes,  hel-  Mad  Dogs 
peth  the  biting  of  a  Mad  Dog  and  of  other  V enemous 
Venetnous  Creatures  .killcth  Wormes  in  Beaflsy 
S  '  Children  fVorms, 


58 


The  En^UJh  ^hjjitian. 


ChHdcvn,  cutteth  and  avoydcth  tough  flcgm 
Lethargy,  purgcth  the  hoad,  helpcihthe  Lethargic,  is  a 
Tkgm,  good  prerervative  againft,  a  rcn'cdy  for  any 
Tcftilcace,  Plagnc  fore.,  or  foul  Ulcer:  takcth  away  fpots 
Apeftums,  and  blemilhes  in  the  Skin,  cafcth pains  of 
Mineral  the  cares  ripeneth  and  breaketh  Impc flumes 
Vapors,  or  other  fwcllings:  And  for  all  thel'e  difeaies 
StinJ[ing  the  Onyons  arealfo  efleduaij  But  the  Garlick 
Vapors,  hath  feme  more  peculiar  vertues  bchdes  the 
Henbane,  forn^er:^7^  It  hath  a  fpeciall  quality  to  difculs 
Hemlocli,  the  inconveniences  coming  by  corrupt  Agues  or 
Pt  olfbane,  Mineral  Vapours  or  by  drinking  corrupt  and 
Dropjie,  linking  waters  j  Asalfoby  taking  ofWolf- 
Cramps,  bane,f  Henbane,  Hemlock,  or  other  poyfonfull 
Convhl-  and  dangerous  heibs.  It  is  alfo  held  good  in 
[ions,  Fal-  Hydropick  dileafes  ,  the  Jaundice,  falling- 
ling~fic\~  ficicnefs,  Cramips,  ConvuJficns,  the  piles  or 
ne(l.  Hemorrhoids  or  other  cold  difeafes.  - 

My  Author  quotes  here  many  difeafes  this  is 
good  for, but  conceals  itsWjces  :  its  heat  is  very 
vehement,  and  al  vehement  hot  things  fend 
up  hut  ill  favor’d  vapors  to  the  brain  j  in  chol- 
ler  ick  men  ’twil  ad  fuel  to  the  fire,  in  men  op- 
prefled  by  melanchcrlly  t’wH  attenuate  the 
humor  and  fend  up  ftrangc  fancies  and  as 
firange  vifions  to  the  hcad,therfoie  lct;it  be  ta¬ 
ken  inwardly  with  great  moderation,  outward¬ 
ly  you  may  make  more  bold  with  it. 
owns  the  herb. 

[  Germander. 


Cough, 

Spleen, 

Vifury, 

Dropjie,. 

Termsp’ro' 

vokes. 

Dead 

Child, 

Foyfen, 

Ulcers, 


Cramps, 


T>ifcription> 

Common  Germander  Ihooteth  forth  fun- 
d,i;y  ftalks  with  fmall  and  fomwhat  round 
leavs,  dented  about  the  edges:  The  Flowers 
fiand  at  the  tops^nf  a  deep  purple  colour:  The 
Root  is  compofed  of  diverffprigs,  which  fhcot 
forth  a  great  way  round  about,  quickly  over- 
fpreading  a  grouxid. 

Vlace 

It  groweth  ufually  with  us  inGardens 
Time 

And  flowreth  in  June  or  July. 

Vertues  and  ufe 

This  taken  with  Honey  (faith  Diofeorides') 
is  a  rcm.'edy  for  Coughs  for  hardnes  of  the 
Spleenjand  difficulty  of  Urin,&  helpeth  thofc 
that  arc  fallen  into  a  Dropfie,  cfpecially  at  the 
beginning  of  the  difcaf,a  Ilec^lion  being  made 
therof  when  it  is  green  &xlrunk  :  It  alfo  brin- 
.  geth  down  Womens  .Courfes  and  expelleth  the 
dead  child :It  is  moft  effeftual  againu  the  poy- 
fon  of  al  Scrpents,being  drunk  inWinc  and  the 
bruifed  herb  omw'ardly  applyed  ufed  with 
Honey,  it  elenfeth  old  and  foul  Ulcers,  and 
made  into  an  Oyl  and  the  Eyes  anoynted  thcr- 
with,  taketh  awayjtheir  dimnefs  and  moyfinefs: 
It  is  likewife  good  for  the  paines  in  the  fides; 
and  Cramps.  The  Deception  thereof  taken 
for  fome  daies  together,  driveth  away  and  cu¬ 


rt  th  bcihTertian  yndQuartanAgues.lt  is  d\io  Agues, > 
good  againft  all  difeafes  of  the  bi’ain  as  con-  Falling 
tinual  Headach  Falling- ficknes,  Mclanchol-J/c^^Jc/J, 
lyjDrcwCncs  andDulnes  of  fpiritjCcnvulficns  Headach, 
and  Palfeys.  A  dram  of  the  feed  taken  in  Pou-  Melan¬ 
ies  purgethby  Urine  and  is  good  againft  the 
yellcwjai  ndice.  The  juyee  of  the  leaves  drop-  dulne(i  of 
ped  into  the  eares  killeth  the  worms  in  them:  Spirit, 
The  tops  therof  when  they  are  in  flower  ftee-  Convulpun 
ped  twenty  four  hours  in  a  draught  of  vihitePalfcy, 
Wine  and  drunk,  killeth  wosmes  in  the  belly.  Tellow, 

It  is  a  meft  prevalent  Herb  oi  Mcrcmy,  'and  Jaundice, 
ftrtngthcns  the  brain  and  apprehentien  ex- 
cecdinglyj  you  may  ice  wbst  humane  vertues 
are’  under  Mircmy  in  the  latter  end  ©f  my 
Ephemcris  for  1651.  fticngthcn  them  when 
weak,  rclievethem,  when  drooping,  by  this 
Herb. 


^  ^ ^  4' *1* 

Stinking^  Gladwin. 

Veferiptiom 

THis  is  one  of  the  kinds  of  Flower-de- 
luces,  having  diverf  Leavs  rifing  from 
the  Roots  very  like  a  Flcwer-de-luce, 
but  that  they  are  ffiavp  edged  on  both  fides, 
and  thicker  in  the  middle,  of  a  deeper  green 
colour,  narrow  er  and  flrarper  pointed  and  of 
a  flreng  ill  fetnt  if  they  be  bruifed  between 
the  fingers:  In  the  midlerifeth  up  a  reafonable 
ftreng  Stalk  a  yard  high  at  leaft,bearcth  3. or  4 
Flowers  at  the  top  made  fomwhat  like  the 
Flowers  of  the  Flow  er-de-luce  with  three  up¬ 
right  Leaves  of  a,  dead  Purplifli  Afti-colour 
with  feme  Veins  difcoloured  in  them,  thco- 
ther  three  do  not  fall  down,  nor  the  three  o- 
ther  final  ones  arc  fo^arched  nor  cot'er  the  low¬ 
er  leaves  as  the  Flower- de-lucc  doth,  but  ftand 
loofe,  or  afunder  from  them  :  After  they  are 
paft,  there  come  up  three  fquaie  hard  Husks 
opening  wide  into  three  parts  when  they  an: 
ripe,  wherin  lie  reddifli  iced,  tnrning  black 
w  hen  it  hath  abidden  long:  The  Root  is  like 
that  of  the  Flower-de-luce  but  reddifh  on 
the  outfide,and  whitifti  within,  very  fharp  and 
hot  in  taft,of  as  evil  a  feent  as  the  leavs. 

Place. 

This  groweth  as  well  on  the  upland  grounds 
as  alfo  in  miOift  places,  in  woods  and  fhadewy 
places  by  the  Sea  fide  in  mrny  places  of  this 
Land,  and  is  i  ft, ally  nurled  up  in  Gardens. 

7me. 

It  ficwrxth  not  until  J;//y,and  the  feed  is  ripe 
InAuguftos  StpUn>ler,ytt\\'.e.  Huskes  after 
they  are  ripe  opening  them.felvcs,  will  hold 
their  feeds  within  them  for  a.  or  3.  Mouths, 
and  not  fhedd  them. 

Virtues  and  Vfc. 

It  is  ufed  by  many  countrey  people  to  purge  F/wv, 
corrupt  tough  Flcgm  and  Choller  which  they  Cholic/j 

do 


T 


5? 


The  EtigliJ!)  ^hyfitian. 


Head, 


Cramp, 

Convulfton 

Gouf, 

Saatica, 

Jltlly-Aih, 

Stronmy, 

fluxes. 


Terms 

provol^cs, 


Vifury, 


Spleen, 

ir  omtls, 

SpiiHiers, 

Thoins, 

broken 

Bones, 


Kings  E- 
iil.  Itch, 
Scabs, 
Blemishes 
in  the 


do  by  drinking  the  decodion of  the  Roots, 
and  fome  to  make  it  work  more  gently  do  but 
infufe  the  Hiced  roots  inAle,and  fome  take  the 
leavs  ferveth  wcl  for  the  weaker  ftornaclis* 
The  Joyce  hcrof  put  up,  or  fnufted  up  the  nofe 
caufeth  neetingj&tirawethfrom  the  head  much 
corrnptionj  &the  pouder  therof  doth  the  lame* 
The  Pouder  therof  drunke  in  wine^hel^eth 
thole  that  arc  troubled  with  CrampSjind  Con- 
Yullion  or  w^^  the  Gout  or  Sciatica  and  giveth 
eaf  tothofe  that  have  any  griping  pains  in  their 
body  or  belly,  and  hclpeththofe  that  have  the 
Strangurytit  is  given  w*^'^  much  profit  to  thofe 
that  have  had  long  Pluxes  by  fhc  fltarp  &  evil 
quality  of  humor^, which  it  ftayeth  haviug  firft 
clcnfed  &  purged  them  by  the  drying  and  bin¬ 
ding  property  thcrin.TheRoot  boyled  in  wine 
and  drun’k  doth  eftcdtually  procure  womens 
cour  fes,  and  ufed  as  a  PeflTary  worketh  the  fame 
effedls,  but  caufeth  Abortion  in  women  with 
child.Half  a  dram  of  the  feed  beaten  to  pouder 
and  taken  in  wine  doth  fpeediiy  cauf  one  to  pis 
w'hich  otherwii  cannot*  The  fame  taken  with 
vinegar,  dtflolveth  the  hardnes  &  fwellings  of 
the  Ipleen.  The  Root  is  very  effedlualin  aL 
Wounds,  and  fpcclally  of  the  head,  as  alfo  to 
draw  foivh  any  fplinters,  Thornes,  Broken 
bones,  or  any  other  thing  flicking  in  the  flefli 

without  caufing  pain,  being  ufed  with  a  little 

Verdigreeie  and  Honey,  and  the  great  Cen¬ 
taury  koot:  The  fame  boyled  in  Vinegac 
and  laid  upon  any  Tumor  or  Swelling,  doth 
very  cftedually  diffolve  and  confumethem, 
yea  even  tfie  fwellings  of  theThroat  called  the 
Kings  evil  *  The  juyee  of  the  Leavs  and 
Roots  healeth  the  Itch  and  all  running  or 
fpreading  Scabs  or  Sores,  and  Blemiflies  or 
Scats  in  the  Skin  wherefoever  they  be. 


Copfes  both  moyfl  an^  dry  grounds  in  many 
places  of  this  Land. 

Time. 

It  Plowreth  about  the  Month  of /w/y* 
Venues  and  ufe. 

Arnoldtts  de  villa  nova,  commendeth  it 
much  againfl  the  Stone  in. the  Reins  and 
Kidneys,  and  to  provoke  Urinu  in  abundance, 
whereby  alfo  the  Gravel  or  Stone  may  be  a- 
voided.  The  Decodlion  of  the  Herb  green  or 
dry,  or  the  diftilled  Water  therof  is  very  efFc- 
dlual  for  inward  Bruifes,asTlfo  to  be  outward¬ 
ly  applied,  it  ftayeth  Ipleedings  in  any  part  of 
the  Body,  andofWouirds  alfo,  the  Pluses  of 
Humors,  the  Bloody  Plux,  and  Womens 
Courfesj  and  is  n©  lei's  prevalent  in  all  Rup¬ 
tures  or  Burftings,  being  drunk  inwardly  and 
outwardly  applied.  It  is  a  Soveraign  W ound 
Herb,  inferior  to  none,  both  for  inward  and 
outward  Hurts,  green  Wounds  and  old  Sores 
and  Ulcers  are  quickly  cured  therewith.  It  is 
alfo  of  efpecial  ufe  in  aft  Lotions  for  Sores  or 
Ulcers  in  the  Mouth,  Throat,  or  privy  parts 
of  Man  or  Woman  .*  The  Decottion  alfo 
help eth  to  fallen  the  Teeth  that  are  loof  in 
the  Gums. 

Venus  claims  the  Herb,  and  therefore  to  be 
fure,  it  reftores  Beauty  loft. 

4  • 

Goutwt)rt,  or  Herb- 

j 

Gcrrard. 


Stone, 

Gravel, 

Difury, 

Wounds, 

flux. 

Bloody 

flux. 

Terms 

flops, 

Kuptms, 


Ulcers, 

Sore 

Mouth  & 
Threrat, 
Teeth  loof, 


Beauty 

lof. 


t 

Golden  Rod. 

Dejeription^ 

THisiifethup  with  brownifh  final  round 
Stalks  two  foot  high  and  fomtimes  more, 
having  thereon  many  narrow  and  long  dark 
greene  leaves  very  feldom  with  any  dents  a- 
bout  the  edges,  or  any  ftrakes  or  white  fpots 
thcrin,yet  they  are  fomtimes  fo  found;  divided 
at  the  tops  into  many  fmall  branches,  with 
div^rf  fmall  yellow  flowers  on  every  one  of 
them,  all  which  are  turned  one  way,and  being 
ripe  do  turn  into  down  &are  caried  away  with 
the  wind.  The  Root  confifteth  of  many  fmall 
fibres  which  grow  not  deep  in  the  ground, but 
abideth  all  the  wiirtertherin,  (hooting  forth 
new  branches  every  yeer,  the  old  ones  dying 
downe  to  the  ground. 

flace. 

It  groweth  m  the  open  places  of  woods  and 


Deferiptien. 

T  His  is  a  low  Herb  feldom  rifing  half  a 
yard  high,  having  fimdry- Leavs  ftan- 
ding  on  brownilh  green  Stalks  by 
threes,  fnipped  about,  and  of  a  ftrong  unplea- 
fant  favour.  The  Umbels  of  Plowers  arc 
white,  and  the  Seed  blackilh,  the  Root  run¬ 
neth  in  the  Ground,  quickly  taking  up  a  great 
deal  of  room. 

'Place. 

It  groweth  by  Hedg  and  Wall  fidcs,  and  of¬ 
ten  in  the  borders  or  Comers  of  Fields,  and 
in  Gardens  alfo.  ^ 

Time. 

It  Plowreth,  and  Seedeth  about  the  end  of, 

July. 

Vertues  and  ufe. 

{ 

C  outre ort  had  not  his  name  for  nothingjbuc  Gout, 
wpon  good  experience  to  help  the  cold  G(M,  Sciatica, 
as.nd  Sciatica,  as  alfo  Joynt  aches,  and  oth^s  Joynts, 
cold  Griefs.  . 

The  very  bearing  of  it  about  one,  cafeth 
the  pains  of  the  Gout,  and  defends  him  that 
bears  it  from  the  Difeaf. 


S  1. 


GromeL 


6o 


\ 


Slone, 

Ci'Avel, 

Sir  anbury, 


i 


The  EngltJ})  Thyjltian. 


>1’ ^  “I*  4'’ ^  ^  ^  • ‘I’ ^  ^ ^  ^ 

Gromel. 

OF  this  I  (hall  briefly  defcribc  three  kinds 
which  are  principally  ufed  in  Phyfick, 
the  Vertues  whereof  arc  alike,  thoush  fom- 
what  different  in  their  manner  and  form  of 
growing. 

Defiription. 

The  greater  Gromel  groweth  up  with  {len¬ 
der  hard  and  hairy  Stalks  trailing  and  taking 
E-oot  in  the  ground  as  it  lieth  thereon,  and 
parted  into  many  other  fmaller  Branches  with 
hairy  dark  green  Leavs  thereon.  At  the  Joynts 
with  the  Leavs  come  forth  very  fmat  blew 
Flowers,  and  after  them  hard  ftony  roundifli 
Seed.  The  Root  is  long  and  woody  abiding 
the  Winter  and  {hooting  forth  frelh  Stalks  in 
the  Spring. 

The  final  wild  Gromel  fendeth  forth  diverf 
upright  hard  branched  Stalks  two  or 
three  foot  high ,  full  of  Joynts  ,  at  eve¬ 
ry  of  which  groweth  final,  long,  hard,  and 
rough  Leavs,  like  the  former  but  lefferjamong 
which  Leavs  come  forth  finall  white  Flowers, 
and  after  them  grayifli  round  Seed  like  the 
former.  The  Root  is  not  very  long,  but  with 
many  Strings  thereat. 

The  Garden  Gromel  hath  diverf  upright 
{lender  woody  hairy  Stalks  brown  and  creflcd, 
very  little  branched,  with  Leavs  like  the  For¬ 
mer,  and  white  Flowers,  after  which  in  rough 
brown  Husks  is  contained  a  white  hard  round 
Seed  fhining  like  Pearl$,&  greater  than  either 
of  the  formcr:ThcRoot  is  like  the  firft  deferi- 
bed,  with  diverf  Branches  and  Strings  thereat, 
which  continueth  (as  the  firft  doth)  all  Win- 
tcr. 

?Uce. 

The  two  firft  grow  wild  in  barren  or  untllled 
places,  and  by  the  way  fides  in  many  places  of 
this  Land.  The  laft  is  a  Nurfling  in  the  Gar¬ 
dens  of  the  curious. 

Time> 

They  all  Flower  from  Midjnmmer  unto 
September  fomtimes,  and  in  the  mean  time  the 
Seed  ripenech. 

Venues  and  ufe. 

Thcfe  arc  accountsd  to  be  of  as  fingular  force 
as  any  other  Herb  or  Seed  what{oevcr,to  break 
the  Stone,  and  to  avoid  it  and  the  Gravel  ei¬ 
ther  in  the  Reins  or  Bladder  j  as  alfo  to  pro-  1 
vokc  Urine  being  flopped,  and  to  help  ,  the 
Strangury.  The  Seed  is  of  greateft  ufe,  being 
bruifed  and  boiled  in  white  Wine,or  iit  Broth, 
or  the  like,  or  the  Ponder  of  the  Seed  taken 
therin  r  T  wo  drams  of  the  Seed  in  Pouder  ta¬ 
ken  with  Womens  Breaft-Milk,  is  very  effe- 
dual  to  procure  a  fpeedy  Delivery  to  fuchWo- 


j  men  as  have  fore  pains  in  their  Travail  and  Travail  in 
cannot  be  delivered.  The  Herb  it  felf  (when  Women> 
the  Seed  is  not  to  be  had)  either  boylcd  or  the 
Joyce  iherof  drunk,  is  cffeaual  to  all  the  pur- 
pofes  aforelaid  but  not  fo  powerful  or  fpeedy 
in  operation. 

The  Hei  be  belongs  to  Dame  Ventis,  and 
therfore  xi'^iars  caufthe  Chollick  or  Stone, 
as  ufually  he  doth  if  in  Virip>  this  is  your 
cure. 

^  ^  i  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^ 

Winter  Green. 

Defeription. 

His  fendeth  forth  7.  8.  ot  9.)  Leaves 
from  a  final  brownifh  creeping  Root,e- 
very  one  ftanding  upon  a  loi^  Footftalk, 
which  are  almoft  as  broad  as  long,  round 
pointed,  of  a  fad  green  colour  and  hard  in 
handling,  and  like  the  Leaf  of  a  Pear-tree, 
from  whence  arifeth  a  {lender  weak  Stalk,  yet 
ftanding  upright,  bearing  at  the  top  many 
final,  white  and  fwcet  fmellin|  Flowers,  laid 
open  like  a  Starjconfiftine  of  five  round  poin¬ 
ted  Leavs,  with  many  yellowilh  threds  ftan¬ 
ding  in  the  middle,  about  a  green  Head,  and 
a  long  ftile  with  them,  which  in  time  groweth 
to  be  the  Seed  Veflcl,  which  being  ripe  is  » 

found  five  fquare  with  a  final  point  at  it,  wccr- 
in  is  contained  Seed  as  finall  as  duft. 

Vlace. 

It  groweth  feldom  in  the  Fields,  but  fre¬ 
quently  in  the  Woods  Northwards,  vi\.  In 
T orl^piire,  Lartcajhire,  and  Scotland^ 

Time. 

It  Flowrcth  about  June  or  July. 

Vertues  and  zefe. 

winter-Green  is  a  fingular  good  Wound 
Herb  and  an  efpecial  Remedy  for  to  heal  green 
Wounds  fpeedily,  the  green  Leavs  being  bru-  ^Voundsy 
fed  and  applied,  or  the  juyee  of  them :  A 
Salve  made  of  the  green  Herbs  ftamped  or  the 
Juyee  boylcd  with  Hogs  Lard,  or  with  Sallet 
OylandWax,  and  fome  Turpentine  added 
unto  it,  is  a  Soveragn  Salve,and  highly  extol¬ 
led  by  the  who  much  ufe  it  to  heal 

all  manner  of  Wounds  and  Sores.  The  Herb 
boyled  in  Wine  and  Water  and  given  to  drink 
to  them  that  have  any  inward  Ulcers  in  their  Vlcers, 
Kidneys  or  Neck  of  the  Bladder,  doth  won-  Kydneys, 
derfully  help  them :  Itftaiethalfo  all  Fluxes 
whether  of  Blood  or  Humors,  as  the  Lask,  Flux, 

Bloody  Flux,  Womens  Courfes,  and  bleeding  Bloody  fax 
of  Wounds,  and  taketh  away  any  Inflamati- Term 
on  fifing  upon  pains  of  the  Heart.  It  is  no  (lops, 
lefs  helpful  for  foul  Ulcers  hard  to  be  cured,  Itiflamati- 
as  alfo  for  Cankers  or  Fiftulacs.  The  diftil-(7«r  , 
led  Water  of  the  Herb  doth  effectually  per-  C  miners, 
from  the  fame  things.  Fiftulaes. 

Groundfel. 


The  Englijh  Thyptian.  6\ 


4*  •$*  *1?  •t' ^  ^ *1?  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  4'' *1^ 

Groundfel. 

DefcriptioiU 

Ur  common  Groundfel  hath  a  round 
green,  and  fomwhat  brownilh  Stalk, 
fprcad  toward  the  top  into  Branches,  fet  with 
long  and  fomwhat  narrow  green  Leavs  cut  in 
on  the  edges,  fomwhat  like  the  Oak  Leavs, 
but  lefTer  and  round  at  the  ends  j  at  the  tops 
of  the  Branches  ftandmany  fmal  green  Heads, 
out  of  which  grow  fmall  yellow  threds  ©r 
thrums,  which  are  the  Flowers,  and  continue 
many  daies  blown  in  that  manner  before  it 
pafs  away  into  Down,  and  with  the  Seed  is 
carried  away  in  the  wind.  The  Root  is  fmal 
and  threddy,  and  foon  perifheth^  and  as  foon 
rifeth  again  of  its  own  lowing,  fo  that  it  may 
be  fecn  many  Months  in  the  Yeer,  both  green, 
and  in  Flower  and  Seed,  for  it  will  Spring 
and  Seed  twice  in  a  yeer  at  leaft  if  it  be  lufFe- 
red  in  a  Garden. 

P/rfCC. 

This  groweth  almoft  every  where,  as  wel  on 
thetopsofWallsasatthe  foot  among  Rub- 
bifti,  and  untilled  grounds,  but  efpecially  in 
Gardens.  ^ 

Time- 

It  Flowreth  as  is;faid  before,  almoft  in  eve¬ 
ry  Month  through  the  yeer. 

Vertues  and  ufe. 

The  Decoftion  of  the  Herb  (faith  Diofcori~ 
des)  made  with  Wine  and  Drunk'  helpeth  the 
ChoUer  pains  in  the  Stomach  proceeding  of  Choller 
in  the  (which  it  may  well  do  by  a  V omit,  as  daily 
Stomach,  experience  Iheweth )  the  juyee  hereof  taken  in 
ICeUova  Drink,  or  the  Decoftlon  of  it  in  Ale,  gently 
dice,  performeth  the  fame  :  It  is  good  againft  the 
trailing-  Jaundice  and  Falling-ficknefs  being  takea  in 
fickntf.  Wine,  as  alfo  againft  difficulty  of  making 
Difury,  Water,  it  provoketh  Urin,  expelleth  Gravel 
C  ravel,  in  the  Reins  or  Kidneys  j  a  dram  thereof  gi- 
Sciatica,  ven  in  Oximel,  after  fome  walking  or  ftir- 
ChoUic\,  ring  the  Body  j  It  helpeth  alfo  the  Sciatica, 
Liver,  griping  of  the  Belly  and  the  Chollick,  helpeth 
Terms  the  defefts  of  the  Liver,  and  provoketh  Wo- 
fiovol{Cs,  mens  Courfes.  The  frelh  Herb  boyled  and 
womens  made  into  a  Pultis  and  aupled  to  the  Breafts 
Ereafts,  of  Women  that  are  fwollen  with  pain  and 
Privy  heat,  as  alfo  to  the  privy  parts  of  Man  or  Wo- 

farts,  man,  the  Seat,  or  Fundament,  orthe.  Arre- 

■  Arteries  ties,  Joynts,  and  Sinews  when  they  are  infla- 
Joynts  med  and  fwoln,  doth  much  eafthem :  and  ufed 
Clt- with Tome  Salt  helpeth  to  dilfolve  Knots  or 
over  Kernels  in  any  part  of  the  Body.  The  Juyee 

Inated,  of  the  Herb,  or  (as  Diofcoridcs  faith)  the 
Kernels,  Leavs  and  Flowers  with  fome  fine  Frankin- 
Wounds  cenfe  in  Pouder,  ufed  in  Wounds  of  the  Body, 
in  the  Nervs,  or  Sinews,  doth  fingularly  help  to  heal 
Sinews,  them :  The  Diftilled  Water  of  the  Herb  per- 


formeth  well  all  the  aforefaid  Cures,  but  e-  Inflamati^ 
fpecially  for  Inflamations  or  watering  of  the  ons  in  the 
Eyes  by  reafon  of  the  Defluxion  of  Rhewm  Syes, 
into  them. 

This  Herb  is  Venus  her  Mrs.  piece,  and  is 
as  gallant  an  Univerfal  Medicine  for  all  Dii- 
eafes  coming  of  heat  whatfoever  they  be,  or  in 
what  part  of  the  Body  foever  they  lie,  as  the 
Sun  fhines  upon  J  ’tis  very  fafe  and  friendly 
to  the  Body  of  Man,  yet  caufeth  Vomiting 
if  the  Stomach  be  afflifted,  if  not,  it  purging, 
and  it  doth  irwith  more  gentlenefs  than  can 
be  expelled.  ’Tis  mpift  and  fomwhat  cold 
withal ,  thereby  caufing  expulfion,  and  re- 
prelfing  the  I^eat  caufed  by  the  motion  of  the 
internal  parts  in  Purges  and  Vomits,  Lay  by 
your  Learned  Receipts,  Take  fo  much  Sen¬ 
na,  fo  much  Scammony,fo  much  Colocynthis, 
fo  much  Infufion  of  Crocus  Metallorum,  &c. 

This  Herb  alone  preferved  in  a  Syrup,  in  3 
diftilled  Water,  in  an  Oyiitment  ftial  do  the 
deed  for  you  in  all  hot  Dife^fes,  and  it  lhall 
do  it,  I.  Safely,  2.  Speedily. 

4^  4*  4  4*  4*  4*  •  4  4*  4  4*  4*  4?  4*  4*  4"t' ’ 

^  ^  ^  j  ^  ^ 

Harts-Tongue. 

’Defeription- 

T  His  hath  diverf  Leavs  rifing  from 
the  Root  everyone  feverally  which 
fold  themfelvs  in  their  firft  tprin- 
ging  and  fpreadiug  j  when  they  are 
full  grown  are  about  a  foot  long, 
fmooth  and  green  above,  but  hard  and  with 
little  Sap  in  them,  and  ftraked  on  the  back 
athwart  on  both  fides  of  the  middle  Rib,  with 
fmal  and  fomwhat  long  brownifh  marks  j  the 
bottoms  of  the  Leavs  are  a  little  bowed  on 
each  fide  of  the  middle  Rib  fomwhat  narrow 
with  the  length,  and  fomwhat  fmal  at  the  end. 

The  Root  is  of  many  black  thleds,  folded  or 
interlaced  together. 

Time> 

It  is  green  all  the  Winter,  but  new  Leavs 
fpring  every  yeer. 

Vertues  and.  Vfc. 

Harts-Tongue  is  much  commended  againft 
the  hardnefs  and  ftoppings  of  the  Spleen  and  Spleen, 
Liver,  and  againft  the  heat  of  the  Liver  and  Liver, 
Stomach,  and  againft  Lasks  and  the  Bloody  Flux, 

Flux  ;  The  Diftilled  Water  tfaerof  is  alfo  ve-  Bloody  flux 
ry  good  againft  the  Paflions  of  the  Heart,  and  Hiccough,. 
to  ftay  the  Hiccough, to  help  the  falling  of  the  Gums, 
Pallat,  and  ftay  the  bleeding  of  the  Gums  be-  V enemous 
ing  gargled  in  the  mouth.  Diofcorides  faith  Beafls. 
it  is  good  againft  the  flinging  or  biting  of 
Serpents. 

/wpitcr  claims  Dominion  over  this  Herb, 
therfore  is  a  fingular  Remedy  for  the  Liver, 
both  to  ftrengthen  it  when  weak,  and  eaf  it 
T  when 


6i 


The  EngUJb  Thyjltian. 


when  ’tis  no  matter  by  what  you 

ftiould  do  well  to  keep  it  in  a  Syrup  all  the 
ycer,  for  though  my  Author  fay  ’tis  green  all 
the  yeer,  I  fcarce  belecv  it. 

As  for  the  ufe  of  it^  my  Diredlions  at  latter 
end  will  be  fufficienc,  and’  enough  for  thofe 
that  are  ftudious  in  Phyfick)  to  whet  their 
Brains  upon  for  one  year  or  two. 

i 

The  Hazel  Nut. 

t 

THefe  arc  fo  well  known  to  every  Boy,  that 
they  need  no  Defcriptlon. 

Vcrtues  and  Vfe. 

The  parched  Kernels  made  into  an  Elcftu- 
ary,  or  the  Milk  drawn  from  the  Kernels  with 
Mead  or  Honeyed  Water,  is  very  good  to  help 
Cough,  an^ildCoughj  and  being  parched  and  alit- 
Fhtifick,  tie  Pepper  put  to  them  and  drunkjdigefteth  the 
Flux,  Diftillations  of  Rhewm  frdm  the  Head :  The 
Terms  dried  Husks  and  Shels  to  the  weight  of  two 
(lops,  drams  taken  in  red  Wine,  ftaiethLasks,  and 
Womens  Courfcs,  and  fo  doth  the  red  Skin 
that  covers  the  Kernels  which  is  more  effe- 
ftual  to  ftay  Womens  Courfes. 

And  if  this  be  true  as  it  is,  then  why  fhould 
the  Vulgar  ib  familiarly  affirm,  that  eating 
Nuts  caufeth  fhortncfs  of  Breath  than  which 
nothing  is  falfer,  for  how  can  that  which 
flrengthens  the  Lungues  caufe  fhortncfs  of 
breath  ?  I  confefs  the  Opinion  is  far  older 
than  I  am,  I  knew  T radition  was  a  Friend  to 
Errors  before,  but  never  that  he  was  the  Fa¬ 
ther  of  Slanders,  or  are  mens  tongues  fo  gi¬ 
ven  to  flandcring  one  another  that  they  muft 
flander  Nuts  too,  to  keep  rheir  tongues  in 
ure  ?  If  any  thing  of  the  I^zel  Nut  be  flop¬ 
ping  ’tis  the  Husks  and  Shels,  and  no  body  is 
fo  mad  to  eat  them  unlefs  Phyfically,  and  the 
red  Skin  which  covers  the  Kernel  which  you 
may  eafily  pull  off.  And  thus  have  I  made  an 
Apology  for  Nuts  which  cannot  fpcak  for 
chcmfelves. 

Hawkweed 

Dejxriptwn- 

This  hath  many  large  hairy  leaves  lying  on 
the  ground,much  rent  or  torn  on  the  udes 
into  many  gafhes  like  Dandelion  but  with 
greater  parts  more  like  the  fmooth  fow  Thiflle 
from  among  w*^^  arifeth  a  hollow  rough  flalk 
two  or  three  foot  high  branched  from  the 
middle  upward,  wherin  are  fet  at  every  Joynt 
longer  leaves,  little  or  nothing  rent  or  cut  in, 
bearing  at  their  top  fundrypale,yellow  Flowers 
confifting  of  many  fmall  narrow  leavs,  broad 


pointed  and  nicked  in  at  the  ends,fet  in  a  dou¬ 
ble  row  dr  more,  the  outermofl  beeing  larger 
than  the  inner,  which  form  mofl  of  the 
Hawliweeds  (  for  there  are  many  kinds  of 
them  )  do  hold,  which  turne  into  down,  and 
with  the  fmall  brownifli  feeds,  is  blown  away 
with  the  wind:  The  Roote  is  long  and  fom- 
what  greater  with  many  fmall  fibres  thereat. 

The  whole  is  full  of  bitter  milke. 

^  Tlace. 

It  growethin  divers  places  about  Field  fides, 
and  the  path  waies  in  dry  grounds. 

Time- 

It  flowreth  &  flies  away  in  the  SumerMonths. 

Venues  and  ufe- 

Uawkweed  (faith  Diofeorides)  is  cooling  Cools, 
fomwhat  drying  and  binding,  and  therfore  T)ries, 
good  for  the  heat  of  the  flomach,  and  gna-  Finds, 
wings  therein,  for  Inflamations  and  the  hot  Gnawing 
fits  of  Agues.The  Juice  therof  in  wine  helpeth  in  the 
digeflion,  difeuffeth  wind,  hindreth  cradities 
abiding  in  the  flomack ,  and  helpeth  the  Inflama-  , 
difficulty  of  making  Water,  the  biting 
of  Venemous  Seipents,  and  fling  of  ihc^^nes,i 
Scorpion,  if  the  herb  be  alfo  outwardly  apply-  Critdity, 
ed  to  the  place,  and  is  very  good  againfl  all  Oifury, 
other  Pdyfons.  A  fcruple  of  the  dryed  juyee  enemous- 
givefi  in  wine  and  vinegar  is  profitable  for  Beafts, 
thofe  that  have  the  Dropfe.  The  dccodion  of  Poyfon, 
the  Herb  taken  with  Honey ,  digeifteth  Oropfie, 
thin  flegm  in  the  cheft  or  lungs,  and  with  Flegm, 
Hyfop  helpeth  the  cough.  The  Decoftion  CboUicli, 
therof  and  of  wild  Succory  made  ivith  wine  Spleen, 
and  taken  helpeth  the  wind  chollkk  and  hard-  watching, 
nds  of  the  fpleen,  it  procureth  refl  and  fleep,  Fufi  flops, 
hindereth  venery  and  venereous  dreams,  coo-  Venerious 
Icth,  heats,  purgeth  the  flomach,  tncxed.kth  l^nams, 
blood,  &  helpeth  the  difeafes  of  the  Reins  and  Reins, 
Bladder.  Outwardly  applied  it  is  Angular  good  Bladder, 
for  all  the  defeds  and  difeafes  of  the  eyes,  Ry^^ , 
ufed  with  fome  womens  Milke,  and  is  ufed  Ulcers, 
w‘^  good  fuccefs  in  fretting  or  creeping  ulcers,  Burnings, 
elpecially  in  the  beginning.  The  green  Herb  Inflama- 
bruifed  and  with  a  little  Salt  applyed  to  any  tions,  St. 
place  burnt  with  fire  before  bliflers  do  arife,  Anthonies 
helpeth  them,  as  alfo  inflamations  St  Antho-  Fire,Heat, 
nies  fire  and  d  Pufhes,  and  cn\pxloT\s,hta.t,snifnltFlegm, 
fal't  Flegm.  The  fame  applyed  with  Meal  Convulflon 
and  fair  water  in  manner  of  a  Poultis  to  any  Cramp, 
place  aft'eded  with  convulfions  and  the  Freclfles, 
Cramp  or  fuch  as  are  out  of  Joynt  doth  Spots, 
give  help  and  eafe.  The  diftillcd  water  Morphew, 
clenfeth  the  skin  and  taketh  away  freckles,  Wrinifles. 
Spots,  the  Morphew  or  Wrinkles  in  the  face. 

The  Hawthorn. 

It  is  not  my  intent  to  trouble  you  with  a 
Defeription  of  this  Tree  which  is  fo  well 
known  that  it  ncedeth  none. 


It 


The  EngUjh  Tbyjltian. 


Stone i 
Vropficy 

TlU-Xy  ' 

Inward 

pains, 

Splinters, 

Thoms- 


It  is  ordinarily  but  a  Hedg  Bufli,  although 
being  pruned  and  areffed  it  groweth  to  be  a 
Tree  of  a  rcafonable  height. 

As  for  the  Hawthorn  tree  at  Glaftenbury, 
which  is  faid  to  flower  yearly  on 
mas  Dayi  it  rather  fhews  the  iuperftition  o 
thofe  who  obferve  it  for  the  time  of  its  Flow- 
rine,  than  any  great  wonder,  fith  li^k 
may  be  found  in  diverfe  o^^er  places  of  this 
lanias  in  Whey-ftreet  in  RumneyMarfh,and 
ncer  unto  Nantwiche  in  Chelhire  by  a  place 
called  White-Green,  where  if  Je  Winter.bc 
milde  they  will  be  white  bloffomes  all  over 
before  and  about  Chnftpm ,  as  in  May, 
if  the  weather  be  frofty,  it  Flowreth  not  until 
January,  or  that  the  hard  weather  be  over. 

.  Vertucs  andufe-  r,  ■ 

The  Berries  or  the  feeds  in  the  Berries 
beaten  to  pouder  and  drunk  in  wine,  arc 
held  Angular  good 
and  are  good  for  the  dropfy.  The 
water  of  the  Blowers  ftayeththe  lask.  Ihe 
feeds  cleared  from  the  DoWn,bruifed  and  boy- 
led  in  wine  &  drunk  is  good  for  inward  tor¬ 
menting  painsr  If  cloathes  and  fpungesbe  wet 
in  the  faid  diftilled  water  and  applyed  to  any 
place  wherin  thornes,  fplinters  or  t  ^  ^  ^ 
do  abide  in  the  Blelh,  it  will  notably 

draw  them  forth.  ^ 

And  thus  you  fee  the  thorn  gives  a  medicine 

for  his  own  pricking, and  fo  doth  almoft  every 
thing  elfc. 

Hemlock 


fafcly  be  applied  to  Inflamations,  Tumors, 
and  Swelling  in  any  part  of  the  Body  (fave  the 
Privy  parts)  as  alfo  to  St.  Anthonies  fire,  Anthonies 
Wheals,  Pufties,  and  creeping  Ulcers  that  rife 
of  hot  {harp  Humors,  by  cooling  and  repel-  Tetters, 
ling  the  heat.  The  Leavs  bruifed  and  laid  to  ^tng- 
the  Brow  or  Forehead,  is  good  for  their  Eyes  tx>orms, 
that  are  red  and  fwollen,  as  alfo  to  take  away 
a  Pin  and  Web  growing  in  the  Eye,  this  is  a  and 
tried  Medicine,  j  T ake  a  fmal  Handful  of  the 
Herb  and  half  lo  much  Bay  Salt  beaten  toge¬ 
ther,  and  applied  to  the  contrary  Wreft  of  the 
Hand  for  twenty  four  Hours,  doth  remove  it 
in  thrice  drefling.  If  the  Root  hereof  be 
roafted.under  the  Embers,  wrapped  in  double 
wet  Papers,  until  it  be  foft  and  tender,  and 
then  applied  to  the  Gout  in  the  Hands  or  Fin-  Gout, 
gers  it  will  quickly  help  this  evil.  If  any  Ihall 
through  miltakc  eat  the  Herb  Hemlocl^  inftead 
of  Parfly,  or  the  Root  inftead  of  a  Parfnip 
(both  which  it  is  very  like)  whereby  hapneth 
a  kind  of  Phrenfie,  or  Perturbation  of  the  fen- 
fes,  as  if  they  were  ftupified  or  drunk,  Tl^e 
Remedy  is  as  PZmy  faith,  to  drink  of  the  befi: 
and  ftrongeft  pure  Wine,before  it  ftrike  to  the 
Heart,  or  Gentian  put  into  Wine  or  a  draught 
of  good  Vinegar,  wherewith  doth  af¬ 

firm  that  he  cured  aW oman  that  had  eaten  the 
Root. 

Saturn  claims  Dominion  oyer  the  Herb,yet 
Iwonder  why  it  may  not  be  applied  to  the  pri¬ 
vities  in  aPriapifmuSjor  continual  ftanding  of 
fheYard,  it  being  very  beneficial  for  that  Dil¬ 
eaf  j  I  fuppofe  my  Authors  Judgment  was  fif^ 
upon  the  oppofit  Difpofition  of  Saturn  to  P^’e- 
nus  in  thofe  Faculties,  and  therfore  he  forbid 


Vefeription. 

TBe  Common  great  Hemlock  groweth  up 
with  a  green  ftalk  four  or  five  foot  high 
or  more,  ful  of  red  fpots  fomtimes,  and  at  the 
Joynts  very  large  winged- leavs  fet  at  them 
which  are  divided  into  many  other  winged 
leaves,  one  fet  againft  another  dented  about 
the  edges,  of  a  fad  green  colour  branched 
towards  the  top  where  it  is  full  of 
of  white  Flowers,  and  afterwards  with  whitilh 
fiat  Seed :  The  Root  is  long,  white,  and 
fomtimes  crooked  and  hollow  within,  the 
whol  Plant  and  every  part  hath  a  ftrong,  hea¬ 
dy,  and  ill  favor’d  feent,  much  offending  the 
Senfes. 

Tlace- 

It  groweth  in  all  Countries  of  this  Land  by 
Wals  and  Hedges  fidcs,  in  waft  Grounds  and 
untillcd  places. 

Time. 

It  Flowreth  and  Seedethin  July,  or  there¬ 
abouts. 

Vertues  and  Vfe. 

Hew/ocif  is  exceeding  cold  and  very  dange¬ 
rous,  efpecially  to  be  taken  inwardly ;  It  may 


- - - 

the  applying  of  it  to  thofe  parts  that  it  might 
not  cauf  Barrennefs,  or  Ipoil  the  Spirit  Procre¬ 
ative,  which  if  it  do,  yet  applied  to  the  Pri-  Lechery < 
vities  it  flops  luftful  thoughts. 

Hemp. 

'T’His  Is  fo  well  known  to  every  good  Jluf- 
*  wife  in  the  Country,  that  I,  ftigil  not  need 
to  write  any  Defeription  of  it. 

*  Time. 

It  is  fown  In  the  end  of  March,  or  begin¬ 
ning  of  Mpril,  and  is  ripe  in  Au^uft  or  Sep- 
tember- 

Vertues  and  Ufe.  i  •  j 

The  Seed  of  Hemp  confumeth  Wind ,  and  iVind, 
by  the  much  ufe  thereof  difperfeth  it  fo  much 
that  it  drieth  up  the  natural  Seed  for  Procrea¬ 
tion  j  yet  being  boyled  in  Milk  and 
helpethfuchashave  a  hot  dry  Cough*  The  Cough, 
Dutch  make  an  Emulfion  out  of  the 

give  it  with  good  fuccefs  to  thofe  that  have  the 

Jaundice,  ei^eciaily  in  the  beginning  of  the  J^uniUe\ 
Difcaf  if  there  be  noAguc  accompanying  it, for 

T  3 


64 


ChoUc'G 

FlUXy 

ChoUici^, 

Bleedings 

WovmSi 

EarvPigSi 

Jnfluma- 

tiorij 

Gouts 

Sinews 

Shrunk- 


The  Thyjitian. 


opcneth  Obftuifticns  ofthe  Gall,  cnci  caufcth  under  Hedg  fides  and  Wals. 
digefiion  of  Choller.  The  Emulficn  or  De- i  Tim> 

cedtien  of  the  Seed  flaieth  Lasks  and  centinu- 1  It  Flowreth  injulys  and  fpringeth  again* 
al  Fluxes, eafeth  the  C  hollick,  and  allaycth  the  yeerly  of  its  own  Seed, 
troublefom  Humors  in  the  Bowels,  and  flaieth  ,  I  doubt  my  Author  miflooky«/ji  for  Junes 
bleeding  at  the  Mouth,  Nofc,  or  other  place, ,  if  not  for 
feme  of  the  Leavs  being  fried  with  the  Blood  I  Vertues  nnd  Z'fc. 

of  that  bleed,  and  fo  given  them  to  eat.  It  is!  The  Leavs  of  do  cool  all  hot  In-Jnjlama- 

held  very  good  to  kill  the  Worms  in  man  or  flamations  in  the  Eyes  or  any  ether  part  of  the  t^ioris 
BeaJb,  and  the  juyee  dropped  into  the  Ears  :  Body  5  and  are  good  to  afl'wage  all  manner 
killeth  Worms  in  them,  and  draweth  forth  of  Swellings  of  the  Cods  or  Womens  Breafts,  ^ 

or  elf  where,  if  they  be  boyled  in  Wine,  and  Brenjis', 
either  applied  thcmfelves  or  the  Fomentation 


Earwigs,  or  other  living  Creatures  gotten  into 
them.  The  Decodtion  of  the  Root  allayeth 
Inflamations  in  the  Head  or  any  other  parts  i 
the  Herb  it  felf,  qf  the  Diftilled  Water  there¬ 
of  doth  the  like :  The  Dccoftion  pf  the 
Roots  eafeth  the  pains  of  the  Gout,  the  hard 
Tumors,  or  Knots  in  the  Joynts,  the  pains 
and  fhrinking  of  the  Sinews,  and  the  pains  of 
the  Hips  :  T  he  frcfti  Juyee  mixed  with  a  lit¬ 
tle  Oyl  and  Butter,  is  good  for  any  place  that 
hath  been  burnt  with  fire  being  thereto  appli¬ 
ed. 

It  is  a  Plant  of  Satwen,  and  good  for  fomc- 
thing  elf  you  fee  than  to  make  Halters  only. 

Henbane. 

Description. 

OUr  common  Henbane  hath  very  large, 
thick,  foft,  woolly  Leavs  lying  upon  the 
grouird,  much  cut  in  or  torn  on  the  edges 
of  a  dark  ill  grayifh  green  colour,among  which 
rife  up  diverl  thick  &(hort  Stalks  two  or  three 
foot  high,  fpread  into  diverf  fmaller  Branches 
with  leffer  Leavs  on  them,  and  many  hollow 
Flowers  fcarce  appearing  above  the  Husks, 
andufwally  torn  on  the  one  fide,  ending  in 
five  round-points  growing  one  above  another, 
of  a  deadim  yellow  colour,  fomwhat  paler  to¬ 
ward  the  edges ,  with  many  purplilh  Veins 
therein,  and  of  a  dark  yellowifh  purple  in  the 
bottom  of  the  Flower,  with  a  fmal  pointel 
of  the  fame  colour  in  the  middle,each  of  them 
Handing  in  hard  clofe  Husk,  which  after  the 
Flower  is  paft,  grow'eth  very  like  th^Iusk  of 
Afarabacca ,  and  fomwhat  (harp  *  he  top 
Points,  wherein  is  contained  much  fmal  Seed 
Very  like  Poppy  Seed,  but  of  a  dusky  grayifh 
colour.  The  Root  is  great,  white  and  thick, 
branching  forth  diverfwaies  under  ground,  fo 
like  a  Parfnip  Root  (but  that  it  is  not  fo 
white)  that  it  hath  deceived  diverf.  The 
who!  Plant  more  than  the  Root  hath  a  heavy 
ill  foporiferous  fmell  fomwhat  ofFenfive. 

Tlace. 

It  commonly  groweth  by  the  way  fides,  and 


warm  j  it  alfo  affwageth  the  pain  of  the  Gout, 

the  Sci/jficd;  and  all  other  pains  in  the  Joynts 

which  arife  from  an  hot  cauf.  And  applied  JoyntSy 

with  Vinegar  to  the  Forehead  and  Temples, 

helpeth  the  Headach  and  want  of  fleep  in  hot  tvatchings 

Feavers.  The  Juyee  of  the  Herb  or  Seed,  or 

the  Oyl  drawn  from  the  Seed  doth  the  like. 

The  Oyl  of  the  Seed  is  helpful  for  the  Deaf-  DcafneSs 
nefs,  Noif,  and  Worms  in  the  Ears,  being  Noife  in 
dropped  therein  j  the  Juyee  of  the  Herb,  or  the  Ears, 
Root  doth  alfo  the  fame.  Thc’Decodion  of 
the  Herb,  or  Seed,  or  both,  killeth  Lice  in 
Man  and  Beall.  The  fume  of  the  dried  Herb 
Stalks  and  Seed  burned,  quickly  healeth  Swel¬ 
lings,  Chilblains,,  or  Kibes  in  the  Hands  or  t^hilblains 
Feet,  by  holding  them  in  the  fume  thereof. 

The  Remedy  to  help  thofe  that  have  taken 
Henbane  is  to  drink  Goats  Milk,Hbnyed  Wa¬ 
ter  or  Pine  Kernels,  with  Sweet  Wine ;  br  in 
the  abfence  of  thefe.  Fennel  Seed,  Nettle 
Seed,  the  Seed  of  CrelTes,  Muftard,or  Radilh, 
as  alfo  Onions,  or  Garlick  taken  in  Wine,  do 
all  help  to  free  them  from  danger,  and  reftofc 
them  to  their  due  temper  again. 

Take  notice  that  this  Herb  mull  never  be 
taken  inwardly ,  outwardly,  an  Oyl,  Oynt- 
ment,  or  Plainer  qf  it,  is  moft  admirable  for 
the  Gout,  to  cool  the,  Venerial  heat  of  the 
Reins  in  the  French  Pox,  to  Hop  the  T ooth-  French- 
ach  being  applied  to  the  aching  fide,  tp  allay  Fox. 
all  Inflamations,  and  to  help  the  Difeafes  be¬ 
fore  premifed. 

I  wonder  in  my  Heart  how  Aftrologers 
could  take  on  them  to  make  this  an  Herb  of 
Jupiter s  and  yet  MiydduJSs  a  man  of  a  pene¬ 
trating  Brain,  was  alfo  of  this  Opinion  as  wel 
as  the  reft,  thq  Herb  is  indeed  under  the  Do¬ 
minion  of  Satnrns  and  Pprove  it  by  this  Ar¬ 
gument. 

All  the  Herbs  which  delight  moft  to  grow 
in  Saturnine  places,  are  Saturnine  Herbs. 

But  Henbane  delights  moft  to  grow  in  Samr- 
nine  places,  and  whol  Cart  loads  of  it  may  be 
found  neer  the  places  where  they  empty  the 
common  Jakes,  and  fcarce  a  ftinking  Ditch  to 
be  found  without,  it  growing  by  it. 

Srgo  ’tis  an  Herb  of  Saturn. 


Herb 


The  E?igjiJh  ^hyfitian. 


Stone, 

Bleeding, 

Te-ms 

fiofi, 

wounds. 

Ulcers 

inthe 

privities. 


Herb  Robert. 

Vefenption. 

T'His  rifeth  up  with  a  reddifh  ftalk  two 
foot  high,  having  clivers  leaves  there¬ 
on  upon  very  long  and  reddifh  footftalkes, 
divided  at  the  ends  into  three  or  five  divifions, 
each  of  them  cut  in  on  the  edges  Tome  deeper 
then  others,  and  all  dented  likewifc  about 
the  edges,  which  often  tims  turn  rcddilli :  At 
the  tops  of  the  ftalk  come  forth  divers  flo¬ 
wers  made  of  five  leavs,  much  larger  then  the 
Doves  foot,  and  of  a  more  reddeiljj  colour 
after  which  come  beak  heads  as  in  others:  The 
Roote  is  fmall  jmd  threddy,  and  fmelleth 
as  the  whole  plarw:  very  itrong,  almoft 
linking. 

Vlace. 

This  groweth  frequently  every  whereby  way 
lides,  upon  ditch  banks,  and  wafl:  grounds 
wherfoever  one  goeth. 

time. 

It  flowreth  in  June  and  July  chiefly, and  the 
feed  is  ripe  ihortly  after. 

yertues  and  Ufe. 

Herb  Robert  is  commended  not  only  a- 
gainft  the  ftone,  but  to  ftay  bloud,  where  or 
howfoever  flowingj  it  fpeedily  healeth  all 
green  wounds,  and  is  effedual  in  old  ulcers  in 
the  privy  parts  or  elfe  where. 

You  may  perfwade  yeur  fclf  this  is  true 
and  alfo  conceive  a  good  rcafon  for  it,  if  yoh 
you  doe  but  confider  ’tis  an  herb  of  Fenus 
for  al  it  hath  gotten  a  mans  name. 

Herb  True-love^ 

0. 

One-berry. 

i 

Vefeription. 

THe  ordinary  Herb  True-love,  hath 
a  fmall  creeping  Root  running  under 
the  upper  cruft  of  the  ground,  fomwhat  like  a 
Couteberafs  Root  but  not  fo  white,  (hooting 
forth  Imks  with  leavs,  fome  wherof  carry  no 
berries,  though  others  do,  every  ftalk  fraooth 
without  Joynts  and  blackilh  green,  ri¬ 
ling  about  hall  a  foot  high  if  it  bear  berries 
otherwife  faldom  fo  high,  bearing  at  the 
top  four  leaves  fee  diredly  one  againft  a- 
nbther  in  maner  of  a  Crofs  or  a  Riband  tied 
(  as  it  is  called  )  on  a  Tiue-loues  Knot: 
which  are  each  of  them  a  part :  fomwhat 


like  unto  a  Nightftiade  Leaf,  but  fomwhat 
broader,  having  fomtimes  but  three  Leavs, 
fomtimes  five,  lomtimes  flx,  and  thefe  fom¬ 
times  greater  than  in  others.  In  the  middle 
of  the  four  Leavs  rifeth  up  one  final  {lender 
Stalk  about  an  inch  high,  bearing  at  the  top 
thereof  one  Llowet  fpread  open  like  a  Star 
confifting  of  four  fmall  and  narrow  long 
pointed  Leavs  of  a  yellowifli  green  colour, 
and  four  other  lying  between  them  lefler  than 
they  ;  in  the  middle  whcrof  ftandeth  a  round 
dark  purplilh  Button  or  Head,  compafled  a- 
bout  with  eight  final  yellow  Mealy  threds, 
with  three  colours  make  it  the  more  confpicu- 
ous  and  lovely  to  behold :  This  Button  or 
Head  in  the  middle,  when  the  other  Leavs  are 
vvithered,  becorncth  'a  blackilh  Purple  Berry 
full  of  juyee  of  the  bignefs  of  a  reafonable 
Grape,  having  within  it  many  white  Seeds  : 

The  whol  Plant  is  without  any  manifeft 
taft. 

j  Vlace. 

It  groweth  in  Woods  and  Copies ,  and 
fomtimes  in  the  corners  or  borders  of  Pields 
and  waft  Grounds  in  very  many  places  of  this 
Land;  and  abundantly  in  the  Woods,  Cop* 
fes,  and  other  places  about  Chiffelhurfi  and 
Maid^one  in  K,enP-  i  '  ■ 

Time. 

Th^  fpring  up  in  the  middle  of  April  oe 
and  are  in  Flower  foon  after  ;  The 
Bernes  are  ripe  in  the  end  of  May, -and  in  fome 
places  in 

Vertues  and  vfe.  . 

The  Leavs  or  Berries  hereof  ard  effedf  ual  to 
expel  poyfon  of  all  forts,  efpeciaily  that  of  the  Poyffftj 
Aconites,  as  alfo  the  Plague,  and  other  Pefti*  Fe^ilenfel 
lential  Difeafes. .  Some  have  been  holpen 
xhtxhy  (uxh  Mathiolui,  that  have  lien  long  in  leavers, 
a  lingring  ficknefs,  and  others  that  by  '^ix.th.^ivitehcrafi 
craft  (as  it  was  thought)  were  become  half 
foolilh,  by  taking  a  dram  of  the  Seeds  or  Ber¬ 
ries  hereof  in  Pouder  every  day  for  twenty 
daies  together,  they  were  reftored  to  their  for¬ 
mer  health.  The  Roots  in  Pouder  taken  in 
Wine  eafeth  the  pains  of  the  Chollick  fpeedi-  choUieJ(i 
ly :  The  Leavs  are  very  elfeftual  as  well  for 
green  Wounds,  as  to  clenfand  heal  up  old  fil-  wounds, 
thy  Sores  and  Ulcers ;  and  is  very  powerful  to  ulcers, 
difeufs  allTumors,and  Swellings  inthe  Cods,  Swellings 
'  privy  Parts,  or  Groyn,  or  in  any  part  of  the  in  the 
Body,  and^eedily  to  ally  all  Inflamations.  Groyn, 
The  Leavs  or  their  Juyee  applied  to*Felons,  Cods,  and 
or  thole  Nails  of  the  Hands  or  Toes  that  have  'Privities, 
Impofthumes  or  Sstes  gathered  together  at  infiama- 
thc  Roots  of  them,  healeth  them  in  Ihort  tions ,  A- 
fpace.  ■  pofihumes. 

The  Herb  is  not  to  be  deferibed  for  the 
premifes,  but  is  fit  to  be  nourilhed  in  every 
good  Womans  Garden. 

Femes  owns  it. 


U 


Hylbp. 


66 


Cough i 

(hortue(^ 

ofb'/eathy 

Hheefing, 

Cro(iliu- 

mersy 

ivormsy 

yellow 

J a  undice  y 

D'lopfiey 

SplceUy 

In  flam  u- 

tionsy 

blacli  and 

blue  jpotSy 

Tooihach, 
Noife  in 
the  Earsy 
Vencmous 
Beaftsy 
Lice,  It¬ 
ching  of  ' 
the  Head 
Talling- 
ftcknefi. 
Wounds, 


The  Thyfitian. 


Hyfop. 


THis  is  Co  well  known  to  he  an  Inhabitant 
in  every  Garden^  that  it  wil  fave  me  La¬ 
bor  in  writing  a  Defeription  thereof.  The 
Vertues  are  as  followeth. 

Venues  and  Ufe, 

Viojeondes  faith  that  Hyfop  boyled  with 
Rue  and  HoneVj  and  drunkj  helpeth  thofc 
that  are  troubled  with  Coughs,  fliortnefs  of 
breath,  wheefing,  and  Rhewmatick  Dillilla- 
tions  upon  the  Lungs;  T aken  alfo  with  Oxi- 
mel,  it  purgeth  grofs  Humors  by  the  Stool  5 
and  with  Honey  killeih  Worms  in  the  Belly  5 
and  with  trefli  or  new  Figs  bruifed,  helpeth 
to  loofen  the  Belly,  and  more  forcibly  if  the 
Root  of  Flower-dc-lucc  and  Crefles  be  added 
the!  to.  It  amendeth  and  cheriflieth  the^  Na¬ 
tive  colour  of  the  Body  fpoiled  by  the  yellow 
Jaundice,  and  being  taken  with  Figs  and  Ni¬ 
tre  helpeth  the  Dtcpfie  and  the  Spleen.  Being 
bovled  with  Wine,  it  is  good  to  wafli  Inflama- 
tions  :  and  taketh  away  black  and  blew  Spots 
and  Marks  that  come  by  Strokes,  Bruiles,  or 
Falsj  being  applied  with  warm  Water.  It  is 
an  exccllentMcdicine  for  the  Quin(ie,or^Swel- 
ling  in  the  Throat,  to  walh  and  gargle  it,^  be¬ 
ing  boyled  with  Figs.  It  helpeth  the  T o'oth- 
ach,  being  boyled  in  Vinegar,  and  gargled 
therwith.  The  hot  Vapors  of  the  Decoftion 
taken  by  a  Funnel  in  at  the  Ears,  eafeth  the 
Ihflamations  and  Cnging  noif  ot  them  :  Be¬ 
ing  bruifed  and  Salt,  Honey,  and  Cummin 
Seed  put  to  it,  it  helpeth  thofe  that  are  flung 
by  Serpents.  The  Oyl  thereof  being  auoyn- 
ted  killeth  L j  and  taketh  away  Itching  of 
the  Head  :  It  helpeth  thofe  that  have  the 
Falling-ficknefs  which  way  foever  it  be  ap¬ 
plied  :  It  helpeth  to  expeftorate  tough  Flegm, 
and  is  effeftual  in  al  cold  Griefs,  or  Difeafes 
oftheCheft  and  Lungs,  being  taken  either 
in  a  Syrup  or  licking  Medicine.  The  green 
Herb  bruifed  and  a  little  Sugar  put  thereto, 
doth  quickly  heal  any  cut,  or  green  Wound, 
being  thereunto  applied. 

The  Herb  is  Jupiters,  and  the  Sign  Cancer-i 
It  flrengthens  all  the  parts  of  the  Body  under 
Cancerznd  Jupiter,  which  wh^theybemay 
be  fourfd  amply  dilcourfed  of  in  my  Aftroio- 
gical  Judgment  of  Difeafes. 

•  Hops. 

•THefc  are  lo  well  known  that  they  need  no 
Defeription,  I  mean  the  manured  kind 
which  £.very  good  Husband  or  Hufwite  is  ac¬ 
quainted  WTth. 


The  wild  Hop  groweth  up  as  the  other  doth, 
ramping  upon  Trees  or  Hedges  that  ftand 
next  unto  them,  with  rough  branches,  and 
Leavs  like  the  former  j  but  it  giveth  fmaller 
Heads  &  in  far  lefs  plenty  than  itjfo  that  there 
is  fcarce  a  Head  or  two  feen  in  a  year  on  di- 
verf  of  this  wild  kind  j  wherein  confiftcth  the  ' 
chief  difl'erence. 

VI  ace. 

They  del-ight  to  grow  on  low  moift  grounds,  ' 

and  arc  found  in  all  parts  of  this  Land. 

Time. 

They  fpring  not  up  until  .April,  and  Flo¬ 
wer  not  until  the  latter  end  of  June,  the  heads 
are  not’gathered  until  the  middle  or  latter  end 
of  September, 

Vertues  and  life. 

This  f*hyfical  operation  is  to  open  Obftru-  ObftruCli- 
(flions  of  the  Liver  and  Spleen  to  clenf  the  onsyLiver, 
Blood,  to  loofen  the  Belly,  to  clenf  the  Reins,5p/cfK, 
from  Gravel,  and  provoke  Urine.  The  T>c- Blood, 
codion  of  the  tops  of  Hops,  as  well  of  the  Reins 
tame  as  the  wild,  worketh  the  fame  eft'eds.  clenfeth. 

In  clenfing  the  Blood  they  help  to  cure  the  French 
French  Difeaf,  and  al  manner  of  Scabs,  Itch,  Pox, 
and  other  breakings  out  in  the  Body,  as  siCo  Scabs, 
al  Tetters,  Ringworms,  and  fpreading  Sores,  itch, 
the  Morphew,  and  all  difcolourings  of  thcT^’^^^’>^f, 
Skin.  The  Decodion  of  'the  Flowers  and  Ring- 
topsydo  help  to  expel  poyfon  that  any  one  hath  -worms 
drunk  :  Half  a  dram  of  the  Seed  in  Pouder  Morphenr  t 
taken  in  drink,  killeth  Worms  in  the  Body, 
bringeth  down  Womens  Courfes,  and  expel-  vr^orms 
lethUrin:  A  Syrup  made  of  the  juyee  and  Terms 
Sugar,  cureth  the  yellow  Jaundice,  eafeth  the  provokes 
Headach  that  comes  of  Heat,  and  tempereth  ^ 

the  heat  of  the  Liver  and  Stomach,  and  is 

rife  of  Chollcr  and  Blood.  Both  the  wild  and 


Liver, 


the  manured  are  of  one  property,  and  alike  ef7 
feflual  in  al  the  aforefaid  Difeafes.  A^ues.  * 

By  all  thefe  Teftimonies,  Beer  appears  to  be 
better  than  Ale. 

Mars  owns  the  Plant,  and  then  Dr.  T{eafon 
will  tell  you  how  it  performs  theJi  adions. 

Horehound 

Dlfcription 

Common  Horehound  groweth  up  with 
fquare  hoary  Stalks,  half  a  yard  or  two 
foot  high,  fet  atthe  Joynts  vviih  two  round 
crumpled  rough  Leays,  of*  fullcn  hoary 
green  colour,  of  a  r'eafonablc  good  feent^ 
but  a  very  bitter  taft  :  The  Flowers  are  Imal, 
white  and  gaping,  fet  in  rough,  hard,  prick¬ 
ly  Husks,  round  about  the  Joynts  with  tlie 
Leaves  from  the  middle  of  the  Stalk  upwards, 
wherein  afterwards  is  found  fmal  round 
blackifh  Seed.  The  Root  is  blackifli,hard,and 

woody. 


The  EngUJh  fhyfitian. 


67 


woody,  with.many  firings  thereat  jandabideth 
many  years. 

Vlacc. 

It  is  found  in  many  parts  of  this  Land,  in 
dry  ^rounds  and  wail  green  places. 

^  rme. 

■  It  T-lowreth  in  or  about  /w/y,  and  the  Seed 

is  ripe  in 

Venues  and  Vfe. 

A,  Decodtion  of  the  dried  Herb  with  the 
Seed,  orthejuyce  of  the  srcen  Herb  taken 
with  Honey,  is  a  Remedy  tor  thofe  that  are 
Difficullv  purfic  or  fhort  winded,  or  have  a  Cough  or 
^fhreath  are  fallen  into  a  Confumption  cither  through 
coueh  ^  ficknefs,  or  thin  Diitillations  of  Rhewm 

tion  tough  Flegm  from  the  Cheft,being  taken  with 

^  the  Roots  of  Iris  or  Orris.  It  is  given  to 
Women  to  bring  down  their  Courfes,  to  ex- 


tton, 

Tlegm 

Temi 


lyovokes,  pel  the  Afterbirth,  and  to  them  that  have  fore 
Afterbirth^  and  long  Travails,  as  alfo  to  thofe  that  have 
Jearinek  taken  Poyfon,  or  are  flung  or  bitten  by  Ve- 
Vovfon,  nemous  Serpents  :  The  Leavs  ufed  with  Ho- 
Venemotii  ncy  purge  foul  Ulcers  flay  running  or  cree- 


Bea[iSi 

ItlcerSi 

Sides, 

Eyes, 

nCellovf 


ping  foies,  and  the  growing  of  the  Flefli  over 
the  Nails.  It  alfo  helpeth  pains  of  the  fides. 
The  juyee  thereof  with  Wine  and  Honey  hel¬ 
peth  to  deer  the  Eyef.ght,  and  fnuffed  up  in¬ 
to  the  Noftrils,purgeth  away  the  yellow  Jaun- 
Jaundicc,  dice,  and  with  a  little  Oyl  of  Rofes  dropped 
Ears  into  the  Ears  eafeth  ths  pains  of  them.  G^z- 
ObliruSli-  Icn  faith  it  openeth  Obflrudions  both  of  the 
'  oftbe  Liver  and  Spleen,  purgeth  the  Breafl  and 
river  and  Lungues  of  Flegm  5  and  ufed  outwardly, 
it  both  clenfeth  and  digefleth.  A  Decoftion 
of  Uorehound  (faith  Mathiolus)  is  availa¬ 
ble  for  thofe  that  have  bad  Livers,  and 
for  fuch  as  have  Itches  and  running  Tet¬ 
ters  5  The  Pouder  hereof  taken,  or  the 
Dccodlion,  killeth  Worms.  The  green  Leavs 
bruifed  and  boyled  in  old  Hogs  Greaf  unto 
an  Oyntment,  healeth  the  biting  of  Dogs 
abiteth  the  Swellings  of  Womens  Breafts,  and 
taketh  away  the  Swelling  and  Pains  that, 
come  by  any  pricking  of  Thorns ,  or  fuch 
like  means,  and  ufed  with  Vinegar  it  clenfeth 
and  healeth  Tetters.  There  is  a  Syrup  made 
ofHorehonndiohc  had  at  the  Apothecaries, 
very  good  for  old  Coughs,  to  rid  the  tough 
Plcgm,  as  alfo  to  avoid  cold  Rhewm  from  the 
Lungs  of  old  Folks,  and  for  thofe  that  are 
Aftmatick  or  fhort  winded. 

^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  • ‘t' ^ ‘I’ ^ 

Horftail.  ; 

'Defeription. 

OF  this  there  arc  many  kinds,  but  I  fhall 
not  trouble  you  nor  my  (elf  with  any 
large  Defeription  of  them,  which  to  do,  were 
but  as  the  Proverb  is,to  6nd  a  knot  in  a  Rufh j 

U  a 


All  the  kinds  hereof  being  nothing  elfc  but 
knotted  Rufhes,  feme  with  Leavs  and  fome 
without :  Take  the  Defeription  of  the  moft 
eminent  fort  as  followeth. 

^he  greater  Horftail  at  the  firft  fpringing 
hath  Heads  fomwhat  like  thofe  of  Afparagus, 
and  after  grow  to  be  hard ,  rough,  hollow 
Stalks,  joymed  at  fundry  places  up  to  the  top, 
a  foot  high,  fo  made  as  if  the  lower  part  were 
put  into  the  upper ,  whereat  grow  on  each 
hde  a  Buflr  of  fmal ,  long ,  Rulh-like  hard 
Leavs  ,  each  part  refembling  a  Horf  Tail 
(from  whence  it  was  fo  called)  At  the  tops  of 
the  Stalks  come  forth  fmal  Catkins  like  to 
thofe  of  Trees.  The  Root  creepeth  under 
ground  having  Joynts  at  lundry  places. 

"Place. 

This  (as  moft  of  the  other  forts  hereof) 
groweth  in  wet  grounds. 

Tifne. 

They  fpring  up  in  April,  and  their  bloo¬ 
ming  Catkins  in /«/y,  feeding  for  the  moft 
p3.Ytm  Atigu^,  and  then  perifh  down  to  the 
ground,  riling  afrefh  in  the  Spring. 


■Splcefii 

Liver, 

Jtchj 

Tetters, 

iVorms, 

"Dogsbt- 

tings. 

Womens 

Breap, 

Thorns, 

Afihmaes. 


Vertaes  andufe. 

Hdrftail  i  the  fmoothcr  rather  than  the- 
rough,  and  the  Leaved  rather  than  the  Bate, 
are  moft  Phyfical  t  It  is  very  powerful  to 
ftanch  bleedings  wherfoever,  either  inward  or  Bleldln£ 
outward,  the  Joyce  or  Decoftion  thereof  be- ^ 
ing  drunk,  or  the  Juyee,  Decoflion,  or  diftil-  Terms 
led  Water  applied  outwardly  :  It  ftaieth  alfo  flops, 
al  forts  of  Lasks  and  Fluxes  in  Mah  or  Wo-  Pijjing 
man,  and  the  piffing  of  Blood,  and  healeth  al-  Blood, 
fo  not  only  the  inward  Ulcers,  and  excoriati-  inward 
ons  of  the  Entrails,  Bladder,  &c.  but  al  o-  ulcers, 
thcr  forts  of  foul,  moift,  and  running  Ulcers,  Excoriati- 
and  foonfodereth  together  the  tops  of  green  ms  of  the 
Wounds  j  It  cureth  alfo\Ruptiu-es  in  Chid-  Bladder, 
dren.  The  Deco dlion  hereof  in  Wine  being  ulcers, 
drunk,  provoketh  Urin,  and  helpeth  the  Stone  Wounds, 
and  the  Strangury}  and  the  Ruptures, 

thereof  drunk  two  or  three  times  in  a  day,  a  vifury, 
fmal  quantity  at  a  time  5  as  alfo  eafeth  the  Stone, 
Intrails  or  Guts,  and  is  effeftual  againft  a  Srangury, 
Cough  that  Cometh  by  diftillation  from  the  Cough, 
Head.  The  Juyee  or  diftillcd  Water  being  Jnflamati- 
warmed,  and  hot  Inflamations,- Pliftules,  ox  ons.  Pirn- 
red  Wheals,  and  other  breakings  out  in  the  pies. 

Skin,  being  bathed  therewith  doth  help  them,  Ked  Faces. 
and  doth  no  lefs  eaf  the  Swellings,  heat,  and 
Inflamations  of  the  Fundament  or  Privy  parts 
in  Man  or  Woman. 

The  Herb  is  belonging  to  Saturn  yet  is  ve¬ 
ry  harmlefs,  and  excsllent  good  for  the  Pre- 
mifes. 

Houf-  / 


(S8 


He  Englijh  Thyjitian. 


Be  at 3. 
Syes3 

Thirft, 

Salt 

JRhewMSj 

Ear  S3 

'Terms 3 

fiopS3 

Tlaxes3 

Juflamet- 

tions3 

St.Antho- 

nies  FirCi 

BurningSi 

ScaldingSi 

Tettersj 

Bing- 

'voorms3 

Corns  OH 

the  Hands 

mdFeetj 

Headachy 

Tren^yy 

watching, 

Bleed'mgy 

'Hetties, 

BeeSy&c. 


^  ^  •t' ^  4' ^  ^ ^  ^ 

Houfleeks^  or  Sen- " 
green. 

THefe  are  fo  wel  known  unto  my  Coun- 
ti-y  Men  that  I  ihal  not  need  to  write  a- 
.  ny  Defeription  of  them. 

Place. 

It  groweth  commonly  on  Walls  and  Houf 
.  lidcsj,  and  flowreth  in  Jnly. 

Venues  ^nd  ufe. 

Our  ordinary  Houfleelt  is  good  for  all  in¬ 
ward  hcatSj  as  wel  as  outward,  and  in  the  Eyes 
or  other  parts  of  the  Body;  A  PolTet  made 
with  rhe  juyee  ofHtf^/Zee'^  is  fingular  good  in 
al  hot  Agues,  for  it  coolcth  and  tempereth  the 
Blood  and  Spirits,  and  quenchthe  thirft  j  and 
is  alfo  good  to  ftay  al  hot  Defluxions  of  fliarp 
and  fait  Rhewms  in  the  Eyes,  the  juyee  be¬ 
ing  dropped  into  them,  or  into  the  Ears  hel- 
peth  them  j  It  helpeth  alfo  other  Fluxes  of 
Humors  into  the  Bowels,  and  the  immode¬ 
rate  Courfes  of  Women.  It  cooleth  and  rc- 
ftraineth  alfo  all  other  hot  Inflamations.  St. 
Anthonies  Fire,  Scaldings  and  Burpings,  the 
Shingles,  fretting  Ulcers,  Cankfers,  Tetters, 
Ringworms  and  the  like,  and  much  cafeth  the 
pain  of  the  Gout  proceeding  from  an  hot  cauf. 
The  Juyee  alfo  taketh  away  Warts  and  Corns 
in  the  Hands  or  Feet,  being  often  bathed 
therwith,  and  the  Skin  of  the  Leavs  being  laid 
on  them  afterwards.  It  cafeth  alfo  the  Head- 
ach ,  and  diftempered  heat  of  the  Brain  in 
Phrenfies,  or  through  want  of  fieep,  being 
applied  to  the  Temples  and  Forehead.  The 
Leavs  bruifed  and  laid  upon  the  Crown  or 
Seam  of  the  Head  ftaieth  bleeding  at  the  Nofe 
very  quickly.  The  dijftifled  Water  of  the 
Herb  is  profitable  for  all  the  purpofes  afore- 
faid  ;  The  Leavs  being  gently  rubbed  on  any 
place  flung  with  Nettles  or  Bees,  doth  quick¬ 
ly  take  away  the  Pain. 

It  is  an  Herb  of  and  It  is  reported 

by  CMyyddus  to  preferve,  it  grows  upon  from 
Lire  and  Lightning. 


thereon,  and  branched  at  the  top  into  diverf 
parts,  with  a  fmal  Leaf  at  the  Foot  of  every 
Branch,  which  is  fomwhat  long,  with  many 
Flowers  fet  along  the  fame,  which  Branch  is 
crooked  or  turned  inwards  before  it  Flowreth  l 
and  openeth  by  degrees  as  the  Flowers  do 
blow,  which  confifl  of  four  Imalpiuplifli  red 
Leavs  of  a  dead  colour,  fcarce  riling  out  of 
the  Husk  wherein  they  ftand ,  •  with  feme 
threds  in  the  middle ;  It  hath  fomtimes  a 
white  Flower.  After  the  Flowers  are  paft 
there  cometh  rough  flat  Seed,  with  a  fmal 
pointel  in  the  middle,  cafily  cleaving  to  any 
Garment  that  it  toucheth,  and  not  fo  eafily 
pulled  off  again ;  The  root  is  black,thick,and 
long,  hard  to  break,  and  ful  of  a  clammy 
Juyee,  fmelling  fomwhat  flrong,  of  an  evil 
feent  as  the  Leavs  alfo  do. 

Place. 

It  groweth  in  moft  places  of  this  Land,  in 
waft  grounds,  and  untilled  places  by  high  way 
fides.  Lanes,  and  Hedg  fides. 

Time. 


Houndftongiiie. 

Vefeription. 

THe  great  ordinary  Homd^ongue  hath 
many  long  and  fomwhat  narrow,  f*ft, 
hairy  darkifh  green  Leavs,  lying  on  the 
ground  fomwhat  like  unto  Buglofs  Leav3,from 
among  which  rifeth  up  a  rough  hairy  Stalk  a- 
bout  two  foot  high,  with  fome  fmaller  Leavs 


It  Flowreth  about  t^V/ay  and/«»c,  and  the 
Seed  is  ripe  fliortly  after. 

Venues  and  Vfe.  ‘  ‘ 

The  Root  is  very  effedually  ufed  in  Pills,  as 
wel  as  in  Decodions,  or  otherwife,  to  flay  al 
lharp  and  thin  Defiuxions  of  Rhewm  from 
the  Head  into  the  Eyes  or  Nofe,  or  upon  the  SytSy  "* 
Stomach  or  Lungs,  as  alfo  for  Coughs  or  ’Hole, 
Ihortncfs  of  breath.  The  Leaves  boyied  in  Stomach, 
Wine  (faith  Diofeorides)  but  others  do  ra-  Lungs,  * 
ther  appoint  it  to  be  made  with  Water,  zndjhonnef 
to  ad  thereto  Oyl  and  Salt,  mollifieth  or  ope-  of  breath, 
neth  the  Belly  downwards  ;  it  alfo  helpeth  to  ^ 

cure  the  bitins  of  a  mad  Dog,  fome  of  the  Mad  Dogs 
Leavs  being  alfo  applied  to  the  Wound  :  The 
Leavs  bruiled,  or  the  Juyee  of  them  boyied  in 
Hogs  Lard,  and  applied,  helpeth  the  falling 
away  of  the  Hair  which  cometh  of  hot  knd 
ftiarp  humors  j  as  alfo  for  any  place  that  is 
fcalded  or  burnt ;  The  Leavs  iaruiled  and  laid  Scaldings 
to  any  green  Wound  doth  heal  it  up  quickly, 

The  Root  baked  under  the  Embers  wrapped  *  ^ 
in  Paft,  or  wet  Papers,  or  in  a  wet  double 
Cloth,  and  thereof  a  Suppofitory  made  and 
put  up  into,  or  applied  to  the  Fundament, doth 
very  effectually  help  the  painful  Piles  or  He-  Hemor^ 
morrhoids.  The  diftilled  Water  of  the  Herb  rhoids, 
and  Roots,  is  very  good  to  al  the  puipofes  sr  M  ounds 
forefaid,  to  be  ufed  as  wcl  inwardly  to  drink.  Ulcers 
as  outwardly  to  wafh  any  fore  places,  for  it  French 
healethal  manner  of  Wounds  and  PiinCturcs  Pear, 
and  thofe  foul  Ulcers  that  arife  by  the  French 
Pox. 

Miyddus  ads  to  this,  that  the  Leavs  laid  un-  - 
der  the  Feet  wil  keep  the  Dogs  from  barking 
at  you,  Houdflongue  becauf  it  ties  the  Tongue 
of  Hounds,  whether  it  be  true  or  not  I  never 
tried  yet  I  have  cured  the  biting  of  a  mad  Dog 
with  this  only  Medicine. 


St  Johns 


<• 


The  Engjipy  Thyjitian. 


6^ 


St.  JohnsAVort 


T 


DefcripUon 

I  He  common  St.  fohns-wert  (hoo- 
teth  forth  brownifti,  upright,  hard, 
round  Stalks,  two  foot  high,  fpvea- 
ding  many  Branches  from  the  iides 
up  to  the  tops  of  them  with  two 
fmal  Leavsfcc  one  againft  another  at  every 
pl?ce,  which  are  of  a  deep  green  colour,  fom- 
vvhat  like  the  Lcavs  of  the  Icfler  Centaury,  but 
narrower,  and  ful  of  fmal  holes  in  every  Leaf, 
which  cannot  be  fo  wel  perceived  as  when  they 
ate  held  up  to,the  light '  At  the  tops  of  the 
Stalks  and  Branches  ftand  yellow  Blowers 
madt'of  five  Leavs  apiece,  with  many  yellow 
threds  in  the  middle,  which  being  bruifed  do 
ycild  a  reddifh  juyee  likp  bloodj  after  which 
edme  fmal  round  Heads  wherein  is  contained' 
fmal  blackifh  Seed  Imelling  like  Rozin :  The 
Root  is  hard  and  woody  with  diverf  ftrings 
and  fibres  at  it,^  and  of  a  Jotownifh  colour 
which  abideth  in  the  ground  many  .yeers,fhoo- 

ting  anew  every  Spring. 

P/^e. 

This  gvoweth  in  W oods  and  Copfes,a$  wel 
thofe  that  are  fbady,  as  open  to  the  Sun. 

Time. 

They  Flower  about  Midfummer,  and  in 
July,  and  their  Seed  is  ripe  in  the  latter  end 
of  July  or  in  Auguft. 

Venues  and  ufe. 

St.  Johns-wort,  is  as  finguki:  a  Wound 
Herb  as  any  other  whatfoever,  either  for  in- 
j  ward  Wounds,  Hurts,  or  Bruifes,to  be  bovled 
.  ®  r  ’  in  Wine  and  drunk,  •r  prepared  into  Oyl  or 
^  ■'  *  Oymment,  Bath  or  Lotion  outwardly :  It 
Obliruif  i-  hath  power  to  open  Obftrudions,  todiffolve 
Swellings  to  clofe  up  the  Lips  of  Wounds,and 
to  ilrcngtbenthepans  that  are  weak  &  feeble. 

*  ^  The  Decoftion  of  the  Herb  and  Flowers,  but 
of '^hc  Seed  efpeciaUy  in  Wine  being  drunk  > 
or  the  Seed  made  into  Pouder  and  drunk  with 
the  juyee  of  Knotgrafs,  belpethal  manner  of 
Spitting  fpitting  and  V omiting  of  Blood ,  be  it  by  any 
and  Vomi‘  Vein  broken  inwardly,  by  Bruifes,  Falls,  or 
nnr  blood,  howfoever  •  The  fame  helpeth  thofe  that  are 
VtnernoHS  bitten  or  flung  by  any  Venemous  Creature  : 
Beci^s,  And  is  good  for  thofe  that  are  troubled  with 
vifury,  the  Stone  in  their  Kidneys,  or  that  cannot 
make  water  J  and  being  applied  provoketh 
Womens  Couries.  Two  drams  of  the  Seed 
of  St.  Johns -won  made  into  Pouder  and 
drunk  in  a  little  Broth ,  doth  gently  expel 
Choller,  Choller,  or  congealed  Blood  in  the  Stomach; 

The  Decoction  of  the  Leavs  and  Seeds  being 
drunk  lomwhat  warm  befor(i  the  Fits  of  A- 
A?ucs,  gucs,  whether  they  be  Tertians,  or  Qiar- 


tanes,  doth  alter  the  firs,  and  by  often  ufing  . 
doth  take  them  quite  away :  The  Seed  is  nuich  Scmtica, 

commended  being  drunk  for  forty  daies  toge- 

thcr.to  help  the  Sciatica:  the  Falling  fickncls,  /cfcncfS, 

and.hePafcy  ■ 

It  is  under  the  Coeleflial  Sign  Leo,  and  un¬ 
der  the  Dominion  of  the  Sun,  it  *^^7  fi® 
you  meet  with  a  Papift  that  is  an  Aftrologcr, 
he  will  tel  you  St.  John  made  it  over  to  hia^ 
by  a  Letter  ofAttourney,cfpecially  if  withal  he 
be  a  Lawyer  alfo. 


Ivy. 


'Defeription. 

THisisfowellkiown  to  every  Child  al- 
to  grow  in  Woods*  upon  the  Trces3  and 
upon  the  ftone  Walls  of  Churches,  Houles, 

&c.  and  fomtimes  to  grow  alone  of  it  felf, 
though  but  feldorri. 

Time. 

It  Flowrcth  not  until  J uly,  and  the  Berries 
arc  not  ripe  til  Chriflide  that  they  have  feit 
the  Winter  Frofls. 

Ve-nuesand  ufe> 

A  pugil  of  the  Flowers,  which  may  be  about 
•a  dram  (faith  Dio/cort^/cj)  drunk  twice  a  day 
in  red  Wine,  helpeth  the  Lask  and  Bloody 
Flux.  It  is  an  enemy  to  the  Nerves  and  bloody 
news  being  much  taken  inwardly,  but  very 
helpful  unto  them  being  outwardly  applied. 

IHiny  faith  that  the  yellow  Berries  are  good  a- 
gainfl  the  Jaundice,  and  taken  before  one  \it  J auniuce, 
let  to  drink  hard,  preferveth  fromdrunken- 
nefs,  and  helpeth  thofe  that  fpit  Blood;  and  Spitting^ 
that  the  white  Berries  being  taken  inwardly.  Blood, 
or  applied  outwardly  killeth  the  Wormsin  the  Worms, 
Belly.  The  Berries  are  a  fingular  Remedy  to  Drunl{cn- 
prevent  the  Plague,  as  alfo  to  free  them  from  «cj?, 
it  that  have  got  itjby  drinking  the  Berries  ther-  PeflilencCj 
of  made  in  Pouder,  for  two  or  three  dales  to¬ 
gether  :  They  being  taken  in  Wine  do  cer¬ 
tainly  help  to  break  the  Stone,  provqke  Urine  Stone, 
and  Womens  Courfes.  The  frefh  Leavs  of  I-  Difury, 
vyboyl-ed  in  Vinegar,  and  applied  warm  to  Terms 
to  the  Tides  of  thofe  that  are  troubled  with  the  provoi{es. 
Spleen,  Ach,  or  Stitch  in  the  fides,  doth  give  Spleen, 
them  much  eaf :  The  fame  applied  with  fomc  stitch, 
Rofewater  and  Oyl  of  Rofes  to  the  T emples 
and  Forehead,eafeth  the  Headach  though  it  be  Headacb, 
of  long  continuace.  The  frefli  Lcavs  boyled 
in  Wine,  and  old  filthy  Ulcers  that  arc  hard  to  Ulcers, 
be  cured  waflied  therewith,  doth  wonderfully 
hclptoclenf  and  heal  them,  it  alfo  quickly 
healcth  green  Wounds,  as  alfo  it  is  cfreftual  Wounds, 
to  heal  al  Btirniijgs  and  Scaldings,  and  all  Burnings, 
kind  of  ezuicerations  coming  thereby,  or  by  Scoldings, 
Salt  Flegm  or  hot  Humors  in  other  parts  oi  jaltVlcgtn, 
the  Body.  The  Juyee  of  the  Berries  or  Lcavs 
fnuifcdupiritothe'Nofc,  purgeth  the  Head 

X 


A 


70 


Rhevmj 
Sore  Em. 


I 


The  En^lijh  ThjiJitian, 


and  Brain  of  thin  Rhcwm  that  maketh  De¬ 
fluxions  into  the  Eyes  and  Nofcj  and  cureth 
the  Ulcers  and  Stench  thcrinrThe  fame  drop¬ 
ped  into  the  Ears  helpeth  the  old  and  running 
Sores  of  them.  Xhofe  that  are  troubled  with 
the  Spleen  flial  find  much  eaf  by  continual 
thinking  out  of  a  Cup  made  of  Ivy,  fo  as  the 
drink  may  fta^  feme  final  time  therin  before 
it  be  drunk.  Oto  faith,  that  Wine  put  into 
fuch  3  Cup  wilfoak through  it,  by  reafon  of 
the  Antipathy  that  is  between  them. 

There  teems  to  be  a  veryAntipathy  between 
Wine  and  Ivy,  for  if  any  have  got  a  furfet  by 
drinking  Wine,  his  fpeedieft  cure  is  to  drink 
a  draught  of  the  fame  Wine  wherein  a  hand¬ 
ful  of  Ivy  Lcavs  being  fitft  bruifedhave  been 
boyled. 

^  4*  4*  4* 4*  ^  ^ 

Kidney  wort, or  Wall- 
Peny  royal. 


Dejeription^ 

THis  hath  many  thick,  flat,  and 
round  Leavs  growing  from  the 
Root ,  every  one  having  a  long 
tootftalk  fanned  underneth  -  about 
the  middle  of  it  and  a  little  imeven- 
y  waved  fomtimes  about  the  edges,  of  a  pale 
'reen  colour,  and  fomwhat  hollow  on  the  up- 
acr  fide  like  a  Sawcer;  from  among  which 
rife  one  or  more  tender  fmooth  hollow  Stalks 
aalf  a  foot  high  with  two  or  three  final  Leavs 
hereon,  ufuflly  not  round  as  thefe  below, but 
bmwhat  long  and  devided  at  the  edges :  The 
:ops  are  fomtimes  devided  into  long  Branches, 
aearing  a  number  of  Flowers,  let  round  about 
ilong  fpike  one  above  another,  which  are 
lollow  and  like  a  little  Bell, of  k  whitilh  green 
:olour,  after  which  come  final  Heads  contai- 
ling  very  final  brownilh  Seed,,  which  falling 
an  the  ground,wil  plentifully  fpring  up  before 
i/Vinter,  if  it  have  moifture.  The  Root  is 
round  and  moft  ufually  fmooth,  grayilh  with¬ 
out  and  white  within,  having  final  fibres  at 
the  head  of  the  Root,  and  bottom  of  the 
Stalk. 

Flace. 

It  groweth  very  plentifully  in  many  places 
of  this  Land,  but  efpecially  in  all  the  Weft 
parts  thereof,  upon  ftone  and  mud  Wals,  upon 
Rocks  alfo,  and  in  ftony  places  upon  the 
ground,  at  the  Bottom  of  old  Trees,  and 
fomtimes  on  the  Bodies  of  them  that  arc  de¬ 
cayed  and  rotten. 

Time. 

It  ufually  Flowreth  in  the  beginning  of  May 
and  the  Seed  is  ripening  quicldy  after,  Ihed- 
deth  it  felf :  fo  that  about  the  end  of  May  ufu¬ 


ally,  the  Lcavs  and  Stalks,  are  withered,  dry, 
and  gone  until  September^  that  the  Leavs 
fpring  up  again,  and  fo  abide  all  Winter. 

Venues  and  Z>fe.  , 

The  juyee  or  the  diftilled  water  bdng  drunk 
is  very  elTcftual  for  al  Inflamations  and  unna-  inflama- 
tural  heats,  to  cool  a  fainting  hot  Stomach,  or  tigfjs 
a  hot  Liver  or  the  Bowels ;  The  bruifed  Herb  TmpleSt 
or  the  place  bathed  with  the  Juyee  or  diftilled 
Water  thereof  and  outwardly  applied  healeth  sr.  jntho- 
Pimples,  Rednefs,  St.  Anthonies  Fire,  and  o-  nigs  fire, 
thcr  outward  heats  and  Inflamations.  The  Sidneys 
faidjuyceor  Water  helpeth  much  alfo  to  heal  \jpiYi;  by  the 
fore  Kidneys,  torn  or  fretted  by  the  Stone,  or  stone } 
exulcerated  within,  and  eafeth  the  pains  j  It  Difury j 
alfo  provoketh  Urine,  and  is  available  for  the  'Dropfie, 
Dfopfie,  and  helpeth  to  break  the  Stone,coo-  stone, 
ling  the  Inflamed  parts  and  other  pains  of  the  Bloody  flux, 
Bowels,  and  the  bloody  Flux  j  It  is  Angular 
good  to  cool  the  painful  Piles,  or  Hemorrhoi-  Uemor- 
dal  Veins,  the  Jfiyce  being  ufed  as  a  Bath  un-  ;  hoids 
to  them,  or  made  into  an  Oyntment  •  It  is  Qout 
no  lefs  effeftual  to  give  eaf  of  pains  to  the  hot  Sciatica 
Gout,,  the  Sciatica,  arid  the  Inflamations  and  cods 
Swellings  in  the  Cods  i  It  helpeth  the  Ker-  vinas 
nels  or  Knots  in  the  Neck  or  Throat,  called 
the  Kings  Evil  j  healtth  Kibes  and  Chilblains 
if  they  be  bathed  with  the  Juyee,  or  anointed  chilblains 
with  an  Oyntment  made  thereof,  and  fome  of 
the  skin  of  the  Leaf  laid  upon  them  j  It  is  al¬ 
fo  ufed  in  green  Wounds  to  ftay  the  Blood, 
and  to  heal  them  quickly. 

Venus  challengeth  the  Herb,  mdtr  Lib/a, 


Knapweed. 


T 


’Defeription. 

he  common  fort  hefof  hath  many  long 
and  fomwhat  broad  darke  green  leaves, 
rifing  from  the  Root  deeply  dented  about  the 
edges,  and  fomtimes  a  little  rent  or  tornc 
on  both  fides  in  two  or  three  places,  and  fom¬ 
what  hairy  withal  among  which  rifeth  up  a 
ftrong  round  ftalk  four  or  five  foot  high,  devi¬ 
ded  into  many  branches  :  at  the  tops  wherof 
ftand  great  fcaljgreen  heads,&from  the  middle 
of  th^m  thruft  forth  a  number  of  dark  purplilh 
red  thrumms  or  threds,  which  after  they  are 
withered  and  paft,  thcr  is  found  divers  black 
Seeds:  lying  in  a  great  deal  of  down,  fomwhat 
like  unco  a  Thiftle  Seed,  butfmaller:  The 
Root  is  white,  hard  and  woody,  with  divers 
fibres  annexed  therunto ,  which  periflieth 
not  but  abideth  with  leavs  theron  all  the  win¬ 
ter,  fhooting  out  frelli  every  Spring. 

Phcc. 

It  groweth  in  moft  Feilds  and  Meadows,ahd 

about  their  borders  and  Hedges  and  in  many 

waft  grounds  alfo,  almoft  every  where. 

\ 

Time. 


\ 


The  EiigliJh  fhyfitian. 


71 


Fluxes, 


•  T'nne- 

It  ufually  flowreth  in  June  and  July, 
and  the  feed  is  tipe  ihortly  after. 

Vcftites  and  Vfe. 

This  Y^a^weed  helpethto  ftay  Tluxes, 
both  of  blood  at  the  mouth  or  nofe,  or  other 
'  V/  ■  outward  partSjand  thofc  veins  tharate  inwardly 
mee  uig,  ^j.  inward  wounds,  as  alfo  the  Fluxes^ 

f  of  the  belly  i  Itftayeth  the  diftillations  of 

vi'r\  “P°^ 

Vbtijuii,  ftomachand  Lungs:  it  is.goodforthofe 

_f  that  are  bruifed  by  any  fall,  blowes,  or  othcr- 

owr,  Yvife.  It  is  very  profitable  for  thofe  that  are 
»ptii'ieS}  a  E^upturc,  by  drinking  the 

c  dccodtion  of  the  Hearbe  and  roots  in  wine. 

and  applying  the  fame  outwardly  to  the  place. 
u  aes-  jj  jj.  gQo^  jn  al  running  fores,cankrous 
and  fiftulous  drying  up  the  moyfture  and 
healing  them  up  gently,  without  fharpnefsi 
ffre  I  doth  the  like  to  running  fores  or  fcabs'of 
vu  a,  other  parts.  It  is  of  fpecial  ufe 

j  (cpps-  for  the  forenefs  of  the  Throat,  fwelling  of  the 
Vvula  and  Jaws;  and  excellent  good  to  ftay 
the  bleeding  and  hcale  up  all  green  wounds. 

Saturn  challengeth  the  herb  for  his  own. 


ons  of  rhewmatick  humors  upon  the  ftomach, 
&killethWorms  in  the  belly  or  ftomack,quie- 
teth  inward  paines  that  arife  from  the  heat,  -»  //  , 
lharpnefs  &  corniption  of  blood  and  Choller  :  » 

The  diftilled  water  herof  taken  by  it  felf,or 
the  pouder  of  the  Herb  or  feed,  is  very  eflfeftual 
.to  at  the  purpofes  aforefasd,  and i^ accounted  as 
one  of  the  moft  Soveraign  remedies  to  cool  all 
maimer  of  inflamations, breakings  out  rfirough  ^  ,  * 

heate,  hot  Swellings,  and  Impoftumarions  * 

Gangrenes,  and  Fiftulous  Cankers,  or  foule  A 
filthy  Ulcers,  being  applyed  or  put  into  ^ 
them  ;  but  cfpecially  for  all  forts  of  Ulcers 
1  and  5orcs  happening  in  theprivie  parts  of 
men  or  women.  It  helpech  all  frefh  and  green 
Wounds,  and  fpeedily  helpeth  them:  The 
juyee  dropped  into  the  Ears,  cleanfeth  them 
being  foule  and  having  running  matter  in 
them. 

Saturn  feems  to  me  to  own  the  Hearb, 
and  yfet  foine  hold  the  Sun,  out  of  doubt  ’tis 
Saturn,  h  is  veryprevalent  for  the  ptemifes: 
as  alfo  for  btoken  ]oynts,and  Ruptures.’ 

^ ^ ^  *3^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^ 


» 

( 

i 


I 


\ 

ft 

a 

f 

I 

1 


Knot-grafs. 

T>efcnptlon.  ^  . 

His  fs  generally  fo  wcl  known  that  it  nec- 
dethnoDefeription. 

'PUce^ 

It  groweth  in  every  County  of  this  Land, 
by  the  High-way  fides  and  by  foot 
paths  in  Fields,  as  alfo  by  the  fides  of  old 
Walls. 

Time' 

It  fpringeth  up  late  in  the  Spring, 
and  abideth  until  Winter ,  when  ^1  the 
branches  perifh.  • 

Venues  andufe* 

The  Juyee  of  the  common  kind  of 

Bleeding,  Knot-gfafs,  is  moft  effeftuall  to  ftay  bleeding 
Heat,  at  the’  mouth ,  being  drunkc  in  fteeled  or 
Flux,  red  Wine:  and  the  bleeding  at  the  Nofe,  to  be 
Bloody  applyed  to  the  Forehead  andTcmples  or  to  be 
Flux,  fquirted  up  into  the  Noftrils.  Andnolcfs 
Courfes  effedluall  to  code  aniftcmper  that  heat  of  the 
fiops,  blood,  &  ftomach  and  to  ftay  any  Flux  of  the 
Vifury,  blood  or  humors, asLask,Bloodyflux,W omens 
Gravel,  courfes ,  and  Running  of  the  Reins .  It  is 
Veitewous  fingular  good  to  provoke  Urine ,  helpe  the 
Beafis,  ftvangurie,  and  dlay  the  heate  thatcometh 
Khewm,  therby,  and  it  is  powerful  byUrin  to  expel  the 
Worms,  Gravell,  orftoneinthe  kidneys  or  Bladder, 
Heat,  a  drana  of  the  pouder  of  the  Herb  bein^taken 
in  wine  for  many  dayes  together :  Being 
boyled  in  wine  and  drunke,it  is  profitable  to 
thofe  that  are  ftung  or  bitten  by  venemous 
creatures,  andvery  effectual  to  ftay  al  defluxi- 


Ladies*Mantk: 

Defcrlptlorii 

His  hath  many  leavs  tifing  from 
the  Root,  ftanding  upon  long 
hairy  fobtftalkes,  being  almorc 
round,  but  a  little  cut  in  on  the 
edges,  into  eight  or  ten  parts  more 
or  lefs,  makings  it  feem  Hke  a  Star,  with  fo 
many  corners  and  points,  and  dented  round  a- 
bout,  of  a  light  green  colour-  fomwfiat  hard  in 
handling,  and  3$  if  it  were  folded,  or  plaited 
at  firft,  and  then  .crumpled  in  diverf  places, 
and  a  little  hairy  as  the  Stalk  is  alfo,  which  ri- 
feth  up  among  them  to  the  height  of  two  or 
three  foot,  with  fuch  like  Leavs  thereon  but 
fmaller,  and  being  weak  is  not  able  to  ftand 
upright,  but  bendeth  down  to  the  Ground,  de- 
vided  at  the  top  into  two  or  three  Imal  Bran¬ 
ches,  with  final  yellowifh  green  Heads ,  and 
Flowers  of  a  whitifti  colour,  breaking  out  of 
them ;  which  being  paft,  there  cometh  final 
yellow  Seed  like  Poppy  Seed  :  The  Root  is 
fomwhat  long  and  black  with  many  ftrings  or 
fibres  thereat. 

■  Place. 

It  groweth  naturally  in  manyPaftures,  and 
Wood  fides,  in  Harfordjhire,  wiltjhire,  and  • 

Yent,  and  other  places  of  this  Land. 

Time. 

It  Flowreth  in  May  and  June,  and  abideth 
after  Seed  time  green  ai  the  Winter. 

Venues  and  Vfe. 

Ladies-Mantle  is  very  proper  for  thofe  Inflamatl^ 
Wounds  that  have  Inflamations,  and  is  very  ons, 

<.  efteduft 


The  Engllp  fhyfttim. 


^Iccdinii 

Vomitings 

Tc  luxes  i 

Bruifes, 

Ruptures, 

R lagging  • 

Breafls, 

Bammefi 

«  omen 

Tvith 

Child. 


effeaualto  ftay  Bleedings,  Vomitings,  Blu- 
xesofalfonsinmanor  woman,  and  Bnuies 
by  Pals  er  othci  wife,  and  helpeth  Ruptures, 
and  fuch  Women  or  Maids  as  have  over  great 
Flagging  Breafts,  cauhng  them  to  grow  lels 
and  hard, being  both  drunk,  and  outwardly  ap¬ 
plied  :  The  dlftilled  water  drunk  for  twenty 
daies  together  helpeth  Conception,  and  to  re¬ 
tain  the  Birth,  if  the  Woman  do  fomtimes  al- 
fo  fit  in  a  Bath  made  of  the  Decodicn  of  the 
Herb.  It  is  one'of  the  moft  finplar  Wound 
Herbs  that  is,  and  therfore  highly  prized  and 
praifed  by  the  GfVWJflns,wto  ufe  in  al  W^ounds 
inwaid  and  outward,  to  drink  the  Decodtion 
thereof  and  wafti  the  Wounds  therewith,  or 
dip  Tents  therein  and  put  them  into  the 
W  ounds,  which  wonderfully  drieth  up  alhu- 
midity  of  tht:  Sores,  and  abateth  Inftamations 
ther  tin.  It  quickly  healcth  al  green  Wounds,- 
not  fiiffering  any  corruption  to  remain  behind, 
and  cureth  old  Sores  though  Piftulous  and 
hollow. 

Venus  claims  the  Herb  as  her  own. 

Lavender. 


His  is  To  wel  known,bcing  an  Inhabitant 
_  in  almoft  every  Garden,  that  itneedeth 
no  Defeription.  •  - 

rime. 

It  flowreth  about  the  end  of^wwe  and  be- 

ginning  of /«/>. 

Verms  andVfe. 

Lmwderisoffpccialgoodufe,  for  all  the 
Head,  Griefs  and  pains  of  the  Head  and  Brains  that 

drains,  proceed  ofacoldcauf,  .  f 

4/?0p/we,ling-fickners,  the  drowfie  or  fluggifli  Malady, 
Falling-  Cramps,  Convulfions,  Palfeys,  and  often 
P.aintings.  It  ftrengtheneth  the  Stomach, 
Lethargy,  and  frecth  the  Liver  and  Sple«  from  Obltru- 

:ramps,'  flions,  prevoketh  Womens  Courfes,  and  ex- 

:onvulfi~  pcllcth  the  dead  Child  and  Afterbirth.  The 

ms,Falfey  Flowers  of  Lavender  fteeped  in  Wine  helpeth 
mb  dead  them  to  make  water  that  are  ftopped,  or  are 
mdjhor  troubled  with  the  Wind  or  Chollick,  if  the 
Ywr,  places  be  bathed  therewith.  A  Dec^ion 
Stomach,  made  with  the  Flowers  of  Lavender,  Hore- 
liver,  hound.  Fennel,  aild  Afparagus  Roots,  and  a 
Spleen,  little  Cinoamon  is  v<ry  profitably  ufed  to  help 
Terms  the  Falling-ficknefs,  and  the  giddinefs  or  twr- 
provokes,  ning  of  the  Brvn.  T  o  gargle  the  Moutli^with 
ChoUick,  the  Decoftion  thXeot  is  good  again  ft  the 
Vertigo,  Toothach.  Two  fpoonfuls  of  the  diftilled 
'oil  of  Water  of  the  Flowers  taken,  helpeth  them  that 
Joycl  have  loft  their  voice  3  as  alfo  the  tremblings 
and  pafCons  of  the  Heart,  and  famtings  and 
Taming,  fwounings,  not  only  being  drunk,  but  applied ; 


to  the  T emples,  or  Noftrils  to  be  fmelt  unto  ^ 
but  it  is  not  fafe  to  ufe  it  where  the  Body 
repleat  with  Blood  and  Humors,  becaufof  the 
hot  and  fubtil  fpirits  wherewith  it  is  poffelfed. 

The  Chimical  Oyl  drawn  from  Lavender,  u- 
fually  called  Oyl  of  Spike,  is  of  fo  fierce  and 
piercing  Spirits  that  it  is  cautioufly  to  be  ufed: 
feme  few  drops  being  fufficient  to  be  given 
with  other  things,  either  for  inward  or  out- 
ward^Griefs. 

tlMcrcury  owns  the  Herb,  and  it  carries  his 
effeds  very  potently. 

Lavender  Gotten  hath  the  fameVertues  with 
Southernwood,  which  fhal  be  fticwed  you 
when  I  come  to  fpcak  of  it. 

Lettice. 

THis  is  fo  wel  known  being  generally  ufed 
as  a  Sallct  Herb,  that  itTs  altogether  ' 
needlcfs  to  write  any  Defeription  thereof. 

Verms  and  Vfe. 

The  juyee  of  Lettice  mixed  or  boyled  with 
OylofRofes,  and  applied  to  the  Forehead 
and  Temples  procureth  Sleep,  and  eafeth  the  Watching, 
Headach proceeding  of  an  hot  caufs  htingHead-ach,- 
eaten  boyled,it  helpeth  to  loofen  the  Belly.  Indige- 
It  helpeth  digeftion,  quencheth  thirft,  encixa- ftion, 
feth  Milk  in  Nurfes,  eafeth  griping jiains  ofTbirli, 
the  Stomach  or  Bowels,  that  come  of  Cbol- Mtllien-^ 
Icr.  It  abateth  Bodily  luft,  reprefleth  Vcnerc-  creafeth, 
ous  Dreams,  beings  outwardly  applied  to  the  CboUer, 
Cods  with  a  little  Camphire  :  Applied  in  the  Bowels, 

fame  manner  to  the  Region  of  the  Heart,  Li- Luji, 

ver  or  Reins,  or  by  bathing  the  faid  place  with  Venenous 
the  Juyee  or  diftilled  Water,  wherein  fQw.tL>reams, 

white  Sanders  and  red  Rofes  are  put  alfo,  it 

not  only  rcprelTeth  the  heat  and  Inflamation  Inflama-. 
therein,  but  comforts  and  ftrengthens  thoUtion, 
parts,  andalfotempereththe  heat  of  Urine. 

advifeth  old  men  to  ufe  it  with  Spices, 
and  where  Spices  are  wanting  to  ad  Mints, 

Rocket  and  lucli  like  hot  Herbs,or  elf  Citron, 

Lemmon,  or  Orange  Seeds,  to  abate  the  cold 
of  one,  and  heat  of  the  other.  The  Seed  and 
diftilled  Water  of  the  Lettice  work  the  like  ef- 
fefts  in  al  things :  but  the  ufe  of  Lettice^  is 

chiefly  forbidden  to  thofe  that  are  fliort  win¬ 
ded,  or  have  any  imperfedion  in  their  Lungs, 
or  Ipit  Blood. 

The  Moen  owns  them,  and  that’s  the  realon 
they  cool  and  moiften  what  heat  and  drincfs 
dAlars  caufeth,  becanfe  Mars  hath  his  fall  in 
Cancer,  and  they  cool  the  Heart,  bccauf  the 
Sun  rqles  it,  between  whom  and  the  Moon  is  i 
Reception  in  the  Generation  of  Man,  as  you 
may  lc.e  in  my  Guide  for  U  omen. 


The 


The  Englijh  Thyjitian, 


71 


The  VVater-Lilly. 


o 

low. 


Defcniition. 

F  thefc  there  are  two  principally  noted 
kinds,  Vi\-  The^hife,  and  the  Tel- 


,  The  white  Lilly  hath  very  large,  round  and 
thick  dark  green  Leavs  lying  on  the  Water, 
fuflained  by  long  and  thick  Footftalks,  that 
i  jfefroma  great  thick,  round  and  long  tube¬ 
rous  black  Root,  fpungy  or  loof  with  many 
l^obs  thereon  like  Eyes,  and  whitifh  within, 
from  amidft  the  which  rife  other  the  like 
thick  and  great  Stalks,  fuftaining  one  large 
white  Flower  thereon,  green  on  the  outfide, 

but  as  white  as  Snow  within,  confiftingofdi- 
verf  rows  of  long,  and  fomwhat  thick  and  nar¬ 
row  Leavs,  fmallcr  and  thinner  the  more  in¬ 
ward  they  be,  encompaflfmg  a  head  within  w' " 
ma  ny  yellow  threds,  or  thrums  in  the  middle, 
where  after  they  are  paft,ftand  round  Poppy¬ 
like  Heads  ful  of  broad,  Oyly,and  bitter  Seed. 

The  yellow  kind  is  little  different  from  the 
former  fave  only  it  hath  fewer  Leavs  on  the 
Flowers,  greater  and  more  fhining  Seed,  and 
•  whitifh  Root,  both  within  and  without : 
The  Roots  of  both  being  fomwhat  Tweet  in 
taft. 

Place. 

They  are  found  growing  in  great  Pools 
and  {landing  Waters,  and  fomtimes  in  flow 
running  Rivers  and  leffer  Ditches  of  Water, 
in  fundry  places  of  this  Land. 

Time. 

They  Flower  moil  commonly  about  the 
end  of  May^  and  their  Seed  is  ripe  in  Au- 
gu[i. 

Vert  lies  and  Ufe. 

The  Leavs  and  Flowers  of  theWateY-Lillies 
are  cold  and  moift,  but  the  Root  and  Seed  is 
fl  j|,eold  and  dry  :  The  Leavs  do  cool  al  Inflama- 
gjl  tions,  and  both  outward  and  inward  heats  of 
.  J  Agues,  and  To  doth  the  Flowers  alfo,  cither, 
*  *  by  the  Syrup  or  Conferve  ,  The  Syrup  hcl- 

peth  much  to  procure  refl,  and  to  fettle  the 
of  Frantick  perfons,  by  cooling  the  hot 
Fren\y3  ^iftemperatureoftheHcad.  The  Seed  as  wel 
Fluxy  as  the  Root  is  effeftual  to  flay  Fluxes  of 
Blood  or  Humors,  cither  of  Wounds,  or  of 
2  w  the  Belley  j  but  the  Roots  are  moft  ufcd,fome 
chufing  the  one,  and  Tome  the  other  to  be 
more  effeftual  to  cool,  bind  and  reftrain  all 
•  Fluxes  in  Man  or  Woman,  as  alfo  the  run- 
f  the  ^  palfage  away  of  the 

Feint  frequent  ufe 

yenerv  hereof  extinguifhethVenereous  aftions  :  The 
Root  is  likewife  very  good  for  thofe  whofe  U.- 
rine  is  hot  and  {harp  to  be  boyled  in  Wine  or 
Water,  and  the  Decoftion  drunk.  The  Di- 


flilled  water  of  the  Flowers  is  very  cfFeftual 
for  al  the  Difeafes  aforefaid,  both  inwardly  ta¬ 
ken  and  outwardly  applied,  and  is  much  com¬ 
mended  to  take  away  Freckles,  Spots,  Sun-  Frecl^leSj 
burn,  and  Morpljew  f^rom  the  Face,  or  other  Spots, 
parts  of  the  Body.  The  Oyl  made  ^  the  Flo-  Sunburn) 
wers  as  Oyl  of  Rofes  is  made,  is  profitably  u-  Morfhew. 
fed  to  cool  hot  Tumors,  and  the  Inflamati- 
ons  of  Ulcers  and  Wounds  and  to.  eal  the 
pains,  and  help  the  Sores. 

The  Herb  is  under  the  'Dominion  of  the 
Koow,  and  therefore  cools  and  moiflens  like 
the  former. 

Liquoris. 


Defeription. 

OUrEngliih  Z,i^«or«  rifeth  up  with  di- 
verf  woody  Stalks,  whereon  are  fet  at 
feveral  diflances,  many  narrow  long  green 
Leavs,  fet  together  on  both  fides  of  the  S^talk> 
and  an  od  one  at  the  end,  very  wel  refembling 
a  yong  Alh-tree  fprung  up  from  the  Seed  : 
This  by  many  yeers  continuance  in  a  place 
without  removing,  and  not  elfe,  will  bring 
forth  Flowers,  many  {landing  together  Spike 
falhion  one  above  another  upon  the  Stalks,  of 
the  form  of  Peafe  BloiToms,  out  of  a  very  pale 
blue  colour,  which  turn  into  long  fomwhat 
flat  and  fmooth  Rods,  wherein  is  contained 
final, round  hard  Seed*.  The  Root  runnetili 
down  exceeding  deep  into  the  ground,  with 
diverf  other  fmaller  Roots  and  Fibres  gro¬ 
wing  with  them,  and  {hoot  out  Suckers  from 
the  mainR-oots  al  about,wherby  it  is  much  en- 
creafed,  ofabrownifh  colour  on  the  outfidc, 
and  yellow  within. 

Tlace. 

It  is  planted  in  Fields  and  Gardens  in  diverf 
places  of  this  Land,  and  thereof  good  profit 
is  made. 

Venues  and  ufe. 

Liquoris  boyled  in  fair  Water  with  fome 
Maidenhair  and  Figs,  maketh  a  good  Drink 
for  thofe  that  have  a  dry  Cough,  or  Hoarce- 
nefs.  Wheeling,  fhortnefs  of  breath  j  and  for 
al  the  Griefs  of  the  Breaft  and  Lungs,Phtifick 
or  Confumptions  caufed  by  the  Diftillation  of 
Salt  humors  on  them.  It  is  alfo  good  in  all 
pains  of  the  Reins,  the  Strangury,  and  heat  of 
Urine  :  The  fine  Pouder  of  Liquoris  blown 
through  a  Quil  into  the  Eyes  that  have  a  Pin 
and  Web  (as  they  cal  it)  or  Rhewmatick  Di- 
{lillations  into  them ,  doth  clenf  and  help 
them ;  The  juyee  of  Liquoris  is  as  effedual  in 
al  theDifeafes  of  the  Breaft  &Lungs,the  Reins 
and  Bladder,as  the  Decodiom  The  Juyee  dif- 
folved  in  Rofe  Water  with  fome  Gum-Traga- 
canth,  is  a  fine  licking  Medicine  for  Hoarce- 
ncfsjWhcefings,  &C. 

/  Liverwort* 


Cough) 

Hoarfnef) 

Vhtific\) 

Co'nfump- 

tiofi) 

Tleins, 

Siranguryj 

Heat  of 

Urine, 

EyeS) 

B  ladder  i 


I 


74 


The  Eti^lijh  Thyjitian. 


Liver, 

Jnflamali- 

m, 

yellow 

Jaundice, 

Spleen, 

Running 

of  the 

Reins, 

Whites, 

"Tetters, 

Ring-r 

worms, 

Surfets. 


Liverwort. 

Vefcription- 

THe  Common  Liverwort,  groweth  clofe 
and  fpreadeth  much  upon  the  ground  in 
moyft  and  fhadowy  places,  with  many  ftd 
green  leaves,  or  rather  (  as  rt  were  )  flicking 
flat  one  to  another,  very  unevenly  cut  in  on 
the  edges,' and  crumpled,  from  among  which 
arife  fmal  flender  ftalks  an  Inch  or  two  high  at 
mofljbearing  fmal  Starlike  Flowers  at  the  tops; 
The  Roots  arc  very  fine  and  fmal. 

Vertues  and  life. 

It  is  a  Angular  good  Herb  for  all  the  difea- 
fes  of  the  L^iver,  both  to  cool  andclenle  it, 
and  helpeth  the  Inflamations  in  any  part, 
and  the  yellow  Jaundice  likewife:  Being  brui- 
fed  and  boyled  infmall  Beer  and  drifnke,  it 
cooleth  the  heat  of  the  Liver  and  Kidneys,and 
helpeth  the  runing  of  the  Reins  in  men,&  the 
Whites  in  Women :  It  is  a  Angular  remedy  to 
flay  the  fpreading  of  '^etterSjRingwormSjand 
other  fretting  and  running  Sores  &  Scabs,and 
is  an  excellent  remedy  for  fuch  whofe  Livers 
are  .corrupted  by  furfets  w*"^  caufeth  their  bo¬ 
dies  to  bi'eak  out,  for  it  fortiAes  the  Liver  ex¬ 
ceedingly  and  make  it  impregnable. 

It  being  under  the  command  of  Jupiter, 
and  under  the  Agn  C oncer » 

^  ^  ^  ^  ^  4*  4  4  4  •  4  4  4  4  4  4  4*  4  4^ 

Loof-ftrife  or  Willow- 
Hearb. 

T)ifcription> 

THe  Common  yellow  Loof-ftrife  groweth 
to  be  four  or  Ave  foot  high  or  more,with 
great  round  flalks  a  little  crefledjdiverfly  bran¬ 
ched  from  flie  middle  of  them  to  the  topsjiuto 
great  &  long  Branches,on  al  w*^^  at  the  Joynts 
ther  grow  long  and  narrow  Lcavs,  but  broader 
below,  andufually  two  ata  Joynt,  yctfom- 
times  three  or  four  fomwhat  like  Willow 
Leaves,  fmooth  on  the  edges,  and  of  a  faint 
green  colour  from  the  upper  Joynts  of  the 
branches,  and  at  the  tops  of  them  alfo  fland 
many  yellow  Flowers  of  Ave  Leaves  a  piece, 
with  diverfe  yellow  threeds  in  the  middle, 
which  turn  into  fmall  round  h,eads,containing 
fmall  cornered  Seeds :  The  Roote  creepeth 
under  '  ground  ,  almofl  like  Couchgrafs, 
but  greater,  and  fhooteth  up  every  Spring, 
brownifli  heads,  which  afterwards  grow  up  in¬ 
to  flalks  :  It  hath  no  feent  nor  tall  but  only 
aftringent. 


Place. 

It  groweth  in  many  places  of  this  Land  in 
moyfl  Mcadowes  and  by  water  Ades. 
rt  Time. 

It  Flovvrcth  from  June  to  .Augu(t. 

Vertues  and  Ufe. 

This  Hearb  is  good  to  flay  all  manner 
of  Bleeding  at  Mouth  or  Nofe  or ovtnds.  Bleeding, 
and  all  Fluxes  of  the  Belly,  and  the  bloody 
Flux,  given  either  to  drinke,  or  taken  by 
Clyfler ;  it  llayeth  alfo  the  abundance  of  Flux, 

W omens  Courfes:  It  is  a  Angular  good  wound  Terms 
Hearb  for  green  wounds,  to  flay  the  bleeding,  (tops, 
and  quickly  to  clofe  together  the  lips  of  the  Wounds, 
Wound,  if  the  herb  be  bruifed  and  the  juyee  Sore, 
only  applyed :  It  is  often  ufed  in  Gargles  Mouth, 
for  foremouthes,  as  alfo  for  the  fecret  parts:  Privities, 
the  fmoke  herof  being  burned  driveth  away  Gnats- 
Flyes  and  Gnats  which  ufe  in  the  night-time 
to  molcfl  people  inhabiting  neere  Marfhes 
and  in  the  Fenney  Countryes.  _ 

444’4’4’4'’4'4’4*4’  444*4^- 4‘4'4'4? 

Loof=ftrife^  with  Spiked 
Heads  of  Flowers. 

Vefeription. 

THis  groweth  with  many  vyoody  fquarc 
flalkes ,  full  of  Joynts  about  three  foot 
high  at  leafljat  everyone  wherof  fland  two  long 
Leaves, fhorter,narrower,and  of  a  deeper  green 
colour  than  the  former  ;  and  fome  brownilh. 

The  flalkes  are  branched  into  many  long 
flemmcs  *of  fpiked  Flowers,  half  a  foot  long, 
growing  in  Rundles  on.c  above  another,  out  of 
taal  husks  very  like  theSpiked  heads  of  Laven¬ 
der,  each  of  which  Flowers  have  Ave  round 
pointed  Leaves  of  a  Purple  Violet  Colour, 
or  fomwhat  inclining  to  rednefs,  in  husks 
fland  fpiall  round  heads,  after  the  Flowers  are 
fallen,  wherein  is  contained  fmall  feed: 

The  Root  creepeth  under  ground  like  unto  the 
yellow,  but  is  greater  than  itj,  and  fo  is  the 
heads  of  the  Leaves  when  they  Arfl  appear 
out  of  the  ground  and  more  brown  than 
the  other- 

Place. 

It  groweth  ufually  by  Rivers,  and  Ditches  -  ' 

Ades  in  wet  grounds ,  as  about  the  Ditclies 
at  and  neer  Lambeth  :  and  in  many  other 
places  of  this  Land.  '  , 

Time- 

It  Flowreth  in  the  months  of  Jtmosii, 

Jidy.  j  r  ‘ 

Vertues  and  Vje- 

This  Herb  is  no  whit  inferior  unto  the 
formers  it  having  not  only  all  the  vertues 
which  the  former  hath,  but  fome  particular 
vertues  of  its  own  fotmdout  by  experience, 
as  namely. 

The 


75 


The  En^lijh  ^hyfitiaru 


F.yes, 

Bllndne^, 


Woundsj 


VlcerSi 

Inflama- 

tionsj 


iQngsE- 

’vili 

Spots, 

Mfyfcsj 

Scars. 


The  diftilled  water  isaprefent  remedy  for  ^ 
hunts  and  blows  on  the  eyes  and  for  blindncfsj' 
fo  as  the  Chriftalinc  humor  be  oot  perifhed  or 
hwrt  i  and  this  hath  been  fufficiently  proved 
true  by  the  experience  of  a  man  of  judgmentj 
who  kept  it  long  to  himfelf  as  a  great  fecret. 
It  alfo  cleareth  the  Eyes  of  duft  or  any  other 
thing  gotten  ipto  themj  and  preferveth  the 
Sight :  It  is  alfo  very  much  available  againft 
Wounds  and  Thrufts,  being  made  into  an 
Oyntment  on  this  manng:  5  To  every  ounce 
oftheWatetj  ad  two  dram^  of  Butter' 
without  Salt,  and  of  Sugar  and  Wax  of  each 
as  much  alfo,  let  them  boyl  gcntly^  all  toge¬ 
ther  ;  Let  Tents  be  dipped  in  the  Liquor  that 
remaineth  after  it  is  cold,  and  put  into  the 
Wounds,  and  the  place  covered  with  a  Lin- 
nen  cloth  doubled  and  anointed  with  the 
Ovntment,  and  this  is  alto  an  -approved  Me¬ 
dicine.  It  likewife  elenfeth  and  healeth  all 
foul  ulcers  and  Sores  wherefoever,  and  uai- 
eth  their  Inflamations  by  wallring  theor  with 
the  Water,  and  laying  on  them  a  green  Leaf 
or  two  in  the  Summer,  or  dry  Learns  in  the 
Winter.  This  Water  gargled  warm  in  tne 
Mouth,  and  fomtimes  drunk  alfo  doth  cure  the 
Quinlie,  or  Kings  Evil  in  the  Throat.  The 
faid  Water  applied  warm  taketh  away  all 
Spots,  Marks,  and  Scars  in  the  Skin  :  And  a 
little  of  it  drunk  quencheth  thirft  when  it  is 

extraordinary.  i 

The  Herb  is  an  Herb  of  the  and 

under  the  Sign  C<i«ce>-,  neither  do  I  know  a 
better  Preferver  of  the  Sight  when  ’tis  well, 
nor  a  better  Curer  of  fore  Eyes  than  Eye- 
bright  taken  inwardly,  and  this  ufed  outward¬ 
ly,  ’tis  cold  in  quality. 


Place. 

It  is  ufually  planted  in  Gardens,  where  if 
it  be  fuffered  it  groweth  huge  and  great. 

Tim. 

It  Flowreth  in  the  end  oi  July,  and  feedeth 
in  Aiiguft. 

Vertues  and.  Vfe. 

It  openeth,-  cutteth  and  digefteth  Humors,  Humors, 
and  mightily  provoketh  Womens  Courfes  and  Terms 
Urine.  Half  a  dram  at  a  time  of  the  dried  provolics. 
Root  in  Pouder  taken  in  Wine,  doth  wonder-  Hi  jury, 
fully  warm  a  cold  Stomach,  helping  digeftion.  Cold  Sto- 
and  confuming  all  raw'&  fuperfluous  moifturc  mach,  In- 
thevein  j  eafeth  al  inward  gripings  and  pains,  digeftion, 
dilTolveth  wind,  and  refifteth  Poyfon  and  in-  wind, 
fedion  :  It  is  a  known  and  much  pradifed  Poyfon, 
Remedy  to  drink  the  Decodion  of  the  Herb  Spidemi- 
for  any  fort  of  Ague,  and  to  help  the  pains  cal  Hifea- 
andTorments  of  the  Body  and  Bowels  coming  fes, 
of  cold.  The  Seed  is  effedual  to  al  the  pur-  Agues, 
pofes  aforefaid  (except  the  laft)  and  worketh 
more  powerfully.  The  dillilled  water  of  the  fie. 
Herb  helpeth  the  Quinfie  in  the  Throat,  if  Pleurefie, 
the  Mouth  and  Throat  be  gargled  and  waflied  Spots, 
therewith  ,  and  helpeth  the  Plurefie,  being  Freclftes, 
drunk  three  or  four  times.  Being  dropped  in-  ^  pyls. 
to  the  Eyes  it  taketh  away  the  rednefs  or  dim- 
nefs  of  them,  it  likewife  taketh  away  Spots  or 
Freckles  in  the  Pace.  TheLeavs  bruifed,and 
fried  with  a  little  Hogs  Lard  &  laid  hot  to  any 
Botch  or  Boyl,  wil  quickly  break  it. 

It  is  an  Herb  of  the  Sun  under  the  Sign 
Tawus,  if  Saturn  offend  the  Throat  (as  he 
alv/aics  doth  if  he  be  occafioner  of  the  Malady 
and  in  Taurus  in  the  Genelis)  this  is  you? 
cure. 


^ ‘I’ 4'’ •  4?  ^ ^  ^  "I?  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^ 


Lovage. 

Hefeription. 

THis  hath  many  long  and  great  Stalks,  of 
large  winged  Leavs  devided  into  many 
parts  like  Smallagc,  but  much  larger 
and  greater,  every  Leaf  being  cut  about  the 
ed<7e8  broadeft  forwards,  and  fmalleft  at  the 
Stalk,  of  a  fad  green  colour,  fmooth  and  fhi- 
nint^,  from  among  which  rife  up  fundry  ftrong 
hollow  green  Stalks,  five  or  fix  foot,  yea  fom¬ 
times  feven  or  eight  foot  high,  full  of  Joynts, 

but  lefferXeavs  fet  at  them  than  grow  below, 
and  with  them  toward  the  tops  come  forth 
longBrancheSjbearing  at  their  tops  large  Um- 
bels,of  yellow  Flowers,  and  after  them  flat 
brownifh  Seed  .*  The  Root  groweth  thick, 
great  and  deep,  fpreading  much  and  enduring 
long,  of  a  brownifl^  colour  on  the  qutfidc,  and 
whitifh  within  :  The  whol  Plant,  and  every 
part  of  it  fmelleth  ftrong,  and  Aromatically, 
and  is  of  an  hot  fharp  biting  taft. 

V  3 


Lungwort. 

Hefeription. 

THis  is  a  kind  of  Mofs,  that  groweth  on 
fui6dry  forts  of  Trees,  efpecially  Oaks, 
and  Beeches,  with  broad  grayifh  tough 
Leavs,diverfly  folded, crumpled, and  pfhed  in 
on  the  edges,  and  fomtimes  fpotted  alfo,  with 
many  fmd  fpots  on  the  upper  fide  :  It  was  ne¬ 
ver  feen  to  bear  any  Stalk  or  Flower  at  any 
time. 

Vertues  and  Vfe. 

This  is  of  great  ufe  with  many  Phyfitians  to 
help  the  Difeafes  of  the  Lungs ,  and  for  tungues. 
Coughs,  Wheefings,  and  fhortnefs  of  breath.  Coughs, 
which  it  cureth  both  in  Man  and  Beaft :  It  wheefings, 
is  very  profitably  put  into  Lotions  that  are  ta-Jhortnefi 
ken  to  ftay  the  moift  Humors  that  flow  to  Ul-  of  breath, 
cers,  and  hinder  their  healing,  as  alio  to;v,alh  vlcers  in 
all  other  Ulcers  in  the  privy  parts  of  Man  or  i^e  Privi-- 
Woman.  ,  ties  and 

It  is  an  excellent  Remedy  boyled  in  Beer  clfwberei 
for  broken-winded  Horlcs. 

7upiter  feems  to  own  thcHcrb. 

^  -M  adder. 


7(S 


The  Englijh  ^hyfitian. 


teltm  , 
Jaundice, 
Obftru^i- 
cns  of  the 
Liver  and 
Gall, 
Spleen, 
Melan- 
cboUy, 
Palfey, 
Sciatica, 
Bruifes 
inward 
and  out¬ 
ward, 
‘Terms 
p^fovo\es, 
Freckles, 
Morphew, 
Scurf 


Madder. 

Defcriptioho 

THeGardeni^/z^/^erftiooKth  forth  many 
very  long}  weak  four  fquare  reddirfi 
Stalks  trailing  on  the  Ground  a  great  way,  ve¬ 
ry  rough  or  hairy  and  full  ofjoyntsi  At  e- 
very  otthofe  Joynts  come  forth  diverf  long, 
and  fomwhat  narrow  Leavs,  {landing  like  a 
Star  about  the  Stalks,  rough  alfo  and  hairy, 
toward  the  tops  whereof  come  forth  many 
fmal  pale  yellow  Flowers  :  after  which  come 
fmal  round  Heads,  green  at  firft,  and  reddifli 
afterwards,  but  black  when  they  are  ripe,wher- 
in  is  contained  the  Seed.  The  Root  is  not 
very  great,  but  exceeding  long,  running  down 
half  a  mans  length  into  thegrouund,  red  and 
very  clear  while  it  is  frelh,  fpreading  diverf 
waifis. 

Place. 

It  is  only  manured  in  Gardens  or  larger 
Reids  for  the  profit  that  is  made  thereof. 

Time. 

It  Flowreth  towards  the  end  of  Summer,and 
the  Seed  is  ripe  quickly  after. 

Fertues  and  Vfe. 

It  hath  an  opening  quality,  and  afterwards 
to  bind  and  ftrengthen.  It  is  an  aflured  Re¬ 
medy  for  the  yellow  Jaundice  by  opening  the 
Obitrudlions  of  the  Liver  and  Galf,and  clcn- 
Cng  thofe  parts ;  It  openeth  alfo  the  Obftru- 
ftions  of  the  Spleen,  and  diminiiheth  the  Me- 
lanchollick  humor.  It  is  available  for  the 
Palfey  and  and  cffedual  for  Bruifes 

inward  or  outward,  and  is  therfore  much  u- 
fed  in  Vulnerary  Drinks.  The  Root  for  all 
thofe  aforefaid  purpofes,  is  to  be  boyled  in 
Wine  or  Water,  as  the  cauf  requireth,  and 
Tome  Honey  or  Sugar  put  thcrunto  afterwards. 
The  Seed  herof  taken  with  Vinegar  and  Ho¬ 
ney,  helpeth  the  Swellings  and  Hardnefs  of 
the  Spleen.  The  Decodion  of  the  Leaves 
and  Branches  is  a  good  Fomentation  for  Wo¬ 
men  to  fit  over  that  have  not  their  Courfes. 
The  Leavs  and  Roots  beaten  and  applied  to 
any  part  that  is  difcoloured  with  Freckles, 
Morphew,  the  white  Scurf,  or  any  fuch  defor¬ 
mity  of  the  Skin,  clenfeth  them  throughly, 
and  taketh  them  away. 

Maidenhair. 

’Defeription. 

O Ur  common  Maidenhair  doth  from  a 
number  of  hard  black  Fibres  fend  forth 
a  great  many  blackilh  fliining  brittle  Stalks, 


hardly  a  fpan  long  j  in  many  not  half  fo  long, 
on  each  fide  fet  very  thick  with  fmal  round 
dark  green  Leavs,  and  fpotted  on  the  back  of 
them  like  other  Ferns. 

Tlace. 

It  groweth  much  upon  old  Stone  Wals  in 
in  the  Weft  parts,  and  in  and  di¬ 

verf  other  places  of  this  Land ,  It  joyeth  like- 
wife  to  grow  by  Springs,  Weis,  and  rockic 
moifl  and  fliadowy  places  j  and  is  alwaies 
green. 

Wall-Rue  j  Or  ordinary  ^ 
White  Maidenhair, 

SDefeription. 

THis  hath  very  fine  pale  green  Stalks,  al-  - 
moft  as  fine  as  hairs,  fet  confufedly  with 
diverf  pale  green  Leavs  on  very  ihort  Foot- 
ftalks,  fomwhat  neer  unto  the  colour  of  Gar¬ 
den  Rue,  and  not  much  differing  in  form,  but 
more  diverfly  cut  in  on  the  edges,  and  thicket, 
fmooth  on  the  upper  part  and  fpotted  finely 
underneath. 

Place  i 

It  groweth  in  many  places  of  this  Land,  aS 
at  Vartford,  and  the  Bridg  at  A(hford  in  I^ent, 
at  Becons field  in.  Buckingbamihirc,  at  wodey 
in  Hnntingtonfinre,  on  Prammn^am  Caftlc' 
in  Suffolk,  on  the  Church  wals  at  Mayfield  in  ‘ 

Suffex,  in  Summer  fet  Jhire  and  diverf  other 
places  of  this  Land,  and  is  green  ift  Winter 
as  well  as  in  Summer.  ,  , 

Fertues  and  Ufe. 

The  Vertucs  of  both  thefc  are  fo  neer  alike  j 
that  although  I  have  deferibed  them,  and  their 
places  of  growing,  fevcrally;  yet  i  fhall  in 
writing  the  Vertues  of  them  joyn  them  both 
together :  as  followeth. 

The  Decodtion  of  the  Herb  Maidenhair 
being  drunk,  helpeth  thofe  that  arc  troubled 
with  the  Cough,  fhortnefs  of  breath,  theycl-  Cough, 
low  Jaundice,  difeafes  of  the  Spleen,  flopping  Jhortnefi 
of  Urin,  and  helpeth  exceedingly  to  break  the  ofjy,  eath. 
Stone  in  the  Kidneys  ;  {in  all  which  Difeafes  the  yellow 
the  Wall  Rue  is  alfo  very  effeftual )  It  provo-  Jaundice, 
keth  Womens  Courfes,  and  ftaieth  both  Blee-  spleen, 
dings  and  Fluxes  of  the  Stomach  and  Belly,  c- 
fpecially  when  the  Herb  is  dry,  for  being  stone, 
green,  it  loofneth  the  Belly,  and  avoideth  Yerms 
Choller  and  Flegm  from  the  Stomach  and  Li-  pyoz/okes, 
ver,  it  clenfeth  the  Lungs,  and  by  reflifying  giecding, 
the  Blood  caufeth  a  good  colour  to  the  who! 

Body:  The  Herb  boyled  in  Oyl  of  Chamo- 
mel,  diflolveth  Knots,  allayeth  Swellings,  and  SwtUinzs, 
drieth  up  moifl  Ulcers.  The  Ly  made  there-  z^lccrs," 
of  is  fingular  good  to  clenf  the  head  from  scurff, 
Scurf ,  and  from  dry  and  running  Sores  ;  Sores, 
flayeth  the  falling  or  fiiedding  of  die  Hair,  saldnefi. 
and  caufeth  it  to  grow  thick,  fair,  and  wcl  co¬ 
loured  J  for  which  purpofe  I’ome  boyl  it  in 

Wine 


The  Englip  fhyfitian. 


77 


Wine  putting  feme  SmaUage  Seed  theretojand 
aftcvwards  fonsie  Oyl*  The  Wall  Rue  is  as 
effectual  as  Maidenhair  in  all  Difeafes  of  the 
Head,  and  falling  or  the  recovering  of  Hair 
again  j  and  generally  for  all  the  aforementi¬ 
oned  Difeafes :  and  befides.  The  Pouder  of 
it  taken  in  drink  for  fourty  daics  together, hel- 
ptch  the  burftings  in  Children* 

Golden  Maidenhair 

Vifeription. 

TO  the  two  former  give  me  leave  toad 
this,  and  I  fhall  do  no  more  but  only 
deferibe  it  unto  you,  and  for  the  Vertucs  re¬ 
fer  you  unto-  the  former,  fith  whatfoever  is 
faid  of  them ,  may  be  alfo  faid  of  this : 

It  hath  many  fmall  brownifti  red  ha)jres  to 
make  up  the  form  of  Leavs  growing  about 
the  ground  from  the  Root,  and  in  the  middle 
of  them  in  Summer,  rife  fmal  Stalks-  of  the 
fame  colour,  fet  with  ve^  fine  yellowifti  green  , 
hairs  on  them,  and  bearing  a  fmal  geld  yellow 
head,  leffer  than  a  Wheat  Corn  ftanding  in  i 
great  Husk.  The  Root  iS  very  final  and 
threddy. 

Vlace. 

It  groweth  on  Bogs  and  Moorifh  places, 
and  alfo  on  dry  ftiadow  places  at 
Heath  and  elfwhere* 

Mallows_,  and  Marfli- 
Mallows. 

THe  Common  Mallowes  are  genenerally 
fo  well  known  that  they  heed  no 
Defeription. 

Our  common  Mui'jh -wallows  have  diverl 
foft  hoary  white  ftalkes  rifing  to  be  three  or 
four  foot  high,  fpreading  forth  many  Branches 
the  Leavs  wherof  are  ioft  and  hairy,  fomwhat 
lefler  then  the  other  Mallow  Leaves  but 
longer  pointed,  cut  (for  the  moft  part)  into 
fome  few  deivifions,  but  deep:  The  Flowers 
arc  many  but  fmaller  alfo  then  the  ojiher  Mal- 
lows&whiteaor  tending  to  a  blufh  colour*  After 
which  come  fuch  like  round  cafes  and  Seed  as 
in  the  other  Mallows*  The  Roots  arc  many 
and  long,  {hooting  from  one  Head,  of  the 
bignels  of  a  Thumb  or  Finger,  very  pliant, 
tough  and  bending  like  Liquoris,  of  a  whitifh 
yellow  colour  on  the  outfide,  and  more  white 
within,  full  of  a  flimy  juyee  which  being, 
layd  in  water  will  thicken  it  as  if  it  were 
gelly .  • 


.  Flace. 

The  Common  MalloWiS  grow  in  every  eoun- 
trey  of  this  Land*. 

The  Common  Marfh  Mallowes  in  moft  of 
the  Salt  Mafhes  from  Woolwich, downe  to  the 
Sea,  both  on  the  Kentifti  anb  Effex  Shoares 
and  in  diverfe  other  places  of  this  Land. 

Time- 

They  Flower  all  the  Summer  Months,  even 
until  the  Winter  do  prill  them  down. 

Vertaes  and.  Vfe- 

The  Leavs  of  either  of  the  forts  above  nar 
med,  and  the  Roots  alfo  boylcd  in  Wine  or 
Water,  or  in  Broth,  with  Parfley  or  Fennel 
Roots,  doth  help  to  open  the  Body,  and  is 
very  convenient  in  hot  Agues  or  other  ii- 
ftempersofthc  Body  to  apply  the  Leavs  fo 
boyled  warm  Ro  the  Belly  j  It  not  only  voi- 
dethhot  Cbollerick  and  other  offenfive  Hu-  ChoUer, 
mors,  but  eafeth  the  pains  and  torments  of  Gripings 
the  Belly  coming  thereby  j  and  are  therefore  ffcc 
nfed  in  all  Clyfters  conducing  to  thofe  piu'po- 
fes ;  The  fame  ufed  by  Nurfes ,  procureth 
them  ftorc  of  Milk. 

The  Decoftion  of  the  Seed  of  any  of  the  ' 

common  Mallows ,  made  in  Milk  or 
Wine  doth  Mervciloufly  help  excoriations, 
the  Phtifick,  Plurifie,  and  other  Difeafes 
of  the  Cheft  and  Lungues  that  proceed 
of  hotcaufes,  if  it  be  continued  taking  (or  TleHrefie^ 
fome  time  together  :  The  Leavs  and  Roots 
work  the  fame  eft'edls :  They  help  much  alfo 
in  the  excoriations  of  the  Guts  and  Bowels 
and  hardnefs  of  the  Mother,  and  in  all  hot 
and  (harp  difeafes  thereof*  The  Juyee,  drunk 
in  Wine,  or  theDccodion  of  them  therein 
doth  help  Women  to  a  fpcedy  and  eafie  Deli-  Travail  in 
very*  Fliny  faithjThat  whofoever  ftial  take  a  th omens 
fpoonful  of  any  of  the  Mallows,  llial  that  day 
be  free  from  all  Difeafes  that  may  come  unto 
him ;  and  that  it  is  fpecial  good  for  the  Fal-  TaUing 
ling-ficknefs.  The  SyrUp  alfo  and  Conferve  jicl(ne(ls 
made  of  the  Flowers  arc  very  cffedlual  for  the  ' 
the  fame  Difeafes,  and  to  open  the  Body  being  ^ 
coftive  :  The  Leavs  bruifed  and  laid  to  the 
Eyes  with  a  little  Honey,  taketh  away  the  Im-  Syes^ 
pbftumations  of  them*  The  Leavs  bruifed  or 
rubbed  upon  any  place  ftung  with^Bees,W3fps  Bees, 
or  the  like,  prefently  taketh  away  the  pains,  iTa^s  &c- 
rednefs,  and  Swellings  that  rife,  thereupon  : 

1  and  faith,  TheDecodion  of  the 

Leavs  and  Roots  helpeth  all  forts  of  Poyfon,  Voyf  Ws 
fo  as  the  Poyfon  be  prefently  voided  by  Vo¬ 
mit.  A  Pultis  made  of  the  Leavs  boyled  and 
bruifed,  whereunco  fome  Bean  or  Barley  Flo-  Hard/wel- 
wdr  and  Oyl  of  Refes  is  an  efpecial  Remedy  a-  lingy 
gainftall  hard  Tumors  and  Infiamations  of  Infiamati-^ 
impoftums  and  Swellings  of  the  Cods  and  on, 
other  parts,  and  eafeth  the  pains  of  them  j  as  Cods 
alfo  againft  the  hardnefs  of  the  Liver  or  Livery 
Spleen,  being  applied  to  the  places*  TheS'p/eew, 
Juyee  of  the  Mallows  boyled  in  old  Oyl  and  T^oughnefi 
applied,  taketh  away  al  roughnefs  of  the  Skin,  of  the  shfn 
Z  as 


The  Englijh  ^hyjitian. 


Scurf,  as  alfo  the  Scurf,  Dandrif,  or  dry  Scabs  in  the 
Vandrif,  Head  or  other  parts  if  they  be  anointed  there- 
Scabby  with,  or  wafhed  with  the  Decedlion,  and 

Htfds,  preferveth  the  Hair* from  falling  oiF.  Itisal- 

Scaiding,  fo  efFeaual  againft  Scaldings  and  Burnings, 
Surning,  St.  Anthonies  fire,  and  all  other  hot,  red ,  and 
St.  Antho""  painful  Swellings  in  any  part  of  the  Body. 
HISS  Fire,  The  Flowers  boyled  in  Oyl  or  Water  (as  eve¬ 
ry  one  is  difpefed)  wherunro  a  little  Honey 
and  Allum  is  put,  is  an  excellent  Gargle  to 
foreMouth  wafh,  clenf,  and  heal  any  fore  Mouth  or 
Throat,  Throat  in  a  fhort  fpace.  If  the  Feet  be  ba¬ 
thed  or  wafhed  with  the  Decodion  of  the 
Leavs,  Roots,  and  Flowers,  it  hclpeth  much 
the  Defluxions  of  Rhewm  from  the  Head. 
Ifthe  Head  be  wafhed  therewith,  it  ftaieth 
Baldmfi,  t  the  falling  and  fhedding  of  the  Hair.  The 
’  green  Leavs  (faith  P%)  beaten  with  Nitre 
Thorns,  and  applied  draweth  out  Thorns,  or  Pricks  in 

the  Flefh.  •  n-  tv  i  • 

The  Marfh  Mallows  are  more  effectual  m 

althc  Difeafos  before  mentioned  :  The  Leavs 
are  likewife  ufed  to  loofen  the  Belly  gently, 
and  in  L^coaions  for  Clyfters,  to  caf  al  pains 
ofthe  Body,  opening  the  ftrait  Paffages,  and 
Stont,  making  them  flippery,  whereby  the  Stone 
may  defoend  the  more  eafily  and  without  pain. 
Reins,  out  of  the  Reins,  Kidneys,  and  Bladder,  and 
Fjdncys,  to  eaf  the  torturing  pains  thereof :  But  the 
Bladder,  Roots  are  of  more  efpecial  ufe  for  thofe  pur- 
CoMghs,  pofeSj  as  well  as  for  Coughs’,  Hoarfnefs, 
Hoarfnefi,  fhortnefs  of  Breath,  and  WheeCngs,  being 
fhormefi  boyled  inWine  or  Honeyed  Water  and  druiik. 
of  Breath,  The  Roots  and  Seeds  hereof  boyled  in  Wine 
Wheefing,  or  Water,  is  with  good  fuccefs  ufed  by  them 
Sxerriati-  that  have  Excoriations  in  the  Guts,  or  the 
m  ofthe  bloody  Flux,  by  qualifying  the  violence  of 
Cuts,  fbaip  fretting  Humors,  cafmg  the  pains, 

and  healing  the  Sorenefs :  It  is  profitably  ta- 
Ruptwres,  ken  ofthem  that  are  troubled  with  Ruptures, 
Cramps,'i  Cramps,  or  Convulfions  of  the  Sinews  j  and 
Convulk-  boyled  in  white  Wine  for  the  Impoffumes  of 
ons,  the  Throat,  commonly  called  the  Kings  Evil, 

The  Kings  and  of  thofe  Kernels  that  rife  behind  the  Ears, 
Evil,  and'inflamations  or  Swellings  in  Womens 
K.ernels,  Breafts.  The  dried  Roots  boyled  m  Milk 
Chincough  and  drunk  is  fpecial  good  for  the  Chin- 
Cough.  flics  ufed  to  give  the  Deco- 

ftion  ofthe  Roots, or  the  juyee  therof  to  drink 
to  thofe  that  were  wounded,  and  ready  to 
faint  through  lofsfof  Blood,  and  applied  the 
famCj  mixed  with  Honey  and  Roxin  to 
munds,  the  Wounds:  As  alfo  the  Roots  boyled  in 
Wine  to  thofe  that  had  received  any  Hurt  by 
Bruifes,  Bruifes,  Falls,  or  Blows,  or  had  any  Bone  or 
Falls,  Member  out  of  Joynt,  or  any  Swelling  pain, 
BloTVS,  or  ach  in  the  Mufclcs,  Sinews,  or  Arteries. 
Mufcles,  The  Muccilage  of  the  Roots,  and  of  Linfeed, 
and  of  Fennugreek  put  together,  is  much  ufed 
in  Pultiles,  Oyntments,  and  Plaiff  ers,to  mol- 
lifie  and  digeft  all  hard  Swellings,  and  the  In- 
flamation  of  them,3nd  to  eaf  pains  in  any  part 
ofthe  Body.  Th»  Seed  either  green  or  dry 


mixed  with  Vinegar  clenfcth  the  Skin  of  the  l^orphcve, 
Morphew,  and  al  other  difcolourings,  being  funbur- 
bathed  therewith  in  the  Sun. 

You  may  remember  that  not  long  fince  there 
was  a  raging  Difeaf  called  the  Bloody  Flux, 
the  Colledg  of  Phyfitians  not  knowing  what  ^ 

to  make  of  it,  called  it  the  Plague  in  the  Guts, 
for  their  wits  were  at  ne  plus  ultra  about  it. 

My  fon  was  taken  with  the  fame  Difeaf,*  and 
the  excoriation  of  his  Bowels  was  exceeding 
great;  my  felf  being  in  the  Country  was  fent 
for  up,  the  only  thing  I  gave  him  was  Mal¬ 
lows  bruifed  and  boyled  both  in  his  Milk  and 
Driii^,  in  two  daies  (the  blefflng  of  God  be¬ 
ing  upon  it)  it  cured  him,  and  I  here  to  (hew 
my  thankfnlnefs  to  God  in  communicating  it 
to  his  Creatures,  leav  it  to  pofterijy. 

Sweet  Marjerom* 

THis  is  fo  wel  known  being  an  Inhabitant 
in  every Garden,that  it  is  needlefs  to  write 
any  Defeription  thereof,  neither  of  the  Win¬ 
ter  Stveet  Marjerom,  nor  Pot  Marjerom. 

^  Flace.  ^ 

They  grow  commonly  in  Gardens  ;  feme 
forts  there  arc  that  grow  wild  in  the  Borders  of 
Corn  Fields,  and  Paftures  in  fundry  places  of 
this  Land,  but  it  is  not  my  purpofe  to  infift 
upon  them :  The  Garden  kinds  being  moft  u- 
fed  and  ufeful. 

Tim. 

They  Flower  in  the  end  of  Summer. 

Vertues  and  Ufe. 

Our  common  Sweet  Marjerom  is  warming 
and  ccmfertable  in  cold  Difeaies  ofthe  Head,  Head, 
Stomach,  Sinews,  and  other  parts,  taken  in- Stomach, 
wardly,  or  outwardly  applied :  The  Decodli- 
on  thereof  being  drunk  helpeth  al  the  Difoafos 
of  the  Cheft  which  hinder  the  freenefs  of  Brcaf, 
breathing  j  and  is  alfo  profitable  for  the  Gh-Obfru- 
ftruaions  ofthe  Liver  and  Spleen  :  It  helpeth  Elions, 

the  cold  Griefs'of  the  Womb,  and  the  windi- 

nefs  thereof,  and  the  lofs  of  Speech,  by  refolu-  Spleen, 
tion  ofthe  Tongue.  The  Decoftion  thereof 
made  with  fomPellitory  of  Spain,  and  longfyind. 
Pepper,  or  with  a  little  Acorus  or  Origanum, 
being  drunk,  is  good  for  thofe  that  are  begin¬ 
ning  to  fall  into  a  Dropfie,  for  thofe  that  can-  jyropfe, 
not  make  Water,  and  againft  pains  and  tor-  Bellyach, 
ments  in  the  Belly  j  it  piovokcth  Womens 
Courfes  if  it  be  put  up  as  a  Peflary.  Being  provofics, 

made  into  Pouder  and  mixed  W'ith  Honey,  it 

taketh  away  the  black  marks  of  Blows  end  Marl(S  of 

Bruifes,  being  therto  applied.  It  is  good  for 

the  Inflamations  and  watering  of  the  Eyes,be- 

ing  mixed  with  fine  Flower  and  laid  unto 

them.  The  Juyee  dropped  into  the  Earseafeth  ypoffe  ht 

the  Pains  and  fingisg  noif  in  them.  It  is  pro"  the  Mars, 

fittily  put  into  thofe  Oyntments  and  Salves 


79 


that  arc  made  to  warm  and  comfort  the  out- 
JoyntSj  ward  parts ,  js  the  Joynts  and  Sinews,  for 
Siwfjvj,  SweHings  alfo  and  places  out  of  Joynt.  The 
SrveUingS}  Pouder  thereof  fnufTed  up  into  the  Nofe,  pro- 
^eejing)  voketh  nceiing,  and  thereby  purgeth  the 
Brain  j  and  chewed  in  the  Mouth  draweth 
Tlegm,  forth  muchPlegm.  The  Oyl  made  thereof 
is  very  warming  and  comfortable  to  the  Joynts 
that  are  ftiff,  and  the  Sinews  that  are  hard  to 
molRfie  and  fupplc  them.  Marjerom  is  much 
ufedinall  odoriferous  Waters,  Pouders,  &c. 
that  arc  for  Orrwment  or  delight. 

It  is  an  Herb  of  Mercury  and  under  Aries, 
and  is  therfore  an  excellent  Remedy  for  the 
Brain  and  other  parts  of  the  Body  and  Mind, 
under  the  Dominion  of  the  fame  Planet. 

Marigolds. 

efe  being  fo  pelentifull  in  every  Garden 
*  are  fo  well  known  that  they  need  no 
Defeription 

Time 

They  Flower  althe  Summer  long,  and  fom- 
times  in  the  Winter  if  it  be  mild. 

Yertues  and  life 

The  Flowers  either  green  or  dryed  are  ufed 
much  in  Poflets,  broths,  and  drinkes,  as  a 
comforter  of  the  Heart  and  fpirits,  and  to 
HeKfti  cxpell  any  malignant  or  peftilential  quality 
which  might  annoy  them. 

SpiritSi  It  is  an  Herb  of  the  Sun  and  under  Leo 
TefiUtneej  they  ftrengthen  tfce  heart  exceedingly,  and  arc 
PoXi  very  cxpulfivc,  and  litttle  lefs  EfFcdiual  in  the 
iiea\les,  fmal  pox  and  meafles  than  Saffron.  Thejuyee 
hot  fwel’’oi  Markold  Leaves  mixed  with  Vinegar, 
lings,  and  any  not  fwclling  bathed  with  it,  inftantly 
giveth  cafe  and  affwageth  it. 

A  plaiftcr  made  with  the  dry  Flowers  in  pou¬ 
der,  hogs  greaf.  Turpentine  andRoxin,  and 
applyed  to  the  breaft.ftrengthens  and  fuccours 
Teavers  infinity  in  feavers  whether  pcftilen- 

pcftileutiall.  ^ 

Mafterwort. 

DeferiptUn- 

Common  Mafterievort  hath  diverf  ftalks 
of  winged  Leaves  devided  into  fun- 
dry  parts,,  three  forthemoft  part  ftanding 
together  at  a  fmall  footftalk  on  both  fides 
of  the  greater ,  and  three  likewife  at  the  end 
of  the  ftalk,  fomwhat  broad  and  cut  in  on 
the  edges,  into  three  or  more  devifions 
all  of  them  dented  about  the  brims,  of  a 
dark  grean  colour,  fomwhat  refembling  the 
Leaves  of  Angelicajbut  that  thefe  grow  lower 


to  the  ground,&  on  leffer  ftalks:  among  which 
rife  up  2.  or  3 .  Ihort  ftalks  about  2.  foot  high, 
and  flender,  with  fuch  like  Leavs  at  the  Joynts 
as  grow  below,but  with  Icffer&fewer  devifions, 
bearing  Umbels  of  white  Flowers ,  and  after 
them  foall,  thinne,  flat,  blackifti  feed  bigger 
than  Dil  feeds  t  The  Root  is  fomwhat  greater 
and  groweth  rather  Cdeways  than  down  deep 
into  the  ground,  (hooting  forth  fundry  heads, 
which  tail  (liarp,  biting  on  the  Tongue,  and  is 
the  hotteft  and  lharpeft  part  of  the  Plant,  and 
the  feed  next  unto  it,  >ciug  fomewhat  blackilh 
on  the  outfide,  and  fmelling  well. 

VUce. 

It  is  ufually  kept  in  Gardens  with  us  in 
England. 

Time. 

It  Flowrethl  and  feedeth  about  the  end 
of  Muguft. 

,  Venues  and  vfe. 

The  Root  of  ^aflerwort  is  hotter  than  Pep¬ 
per  and  very  available  in  all  cold  Greifes  and  Cold 
Difeafes  both  of  Stomach  and  body,  diffol-  Grief s^ 
ving  very  powerfully  upward  and  downward:  Stemach, 
It  is  alfo  ufed  in  a  dccodlion  with  SNinAz-wind, 
galnft  all  cold  rhewms,  or  difliliationsupon  Cold 
the  Lungs,  and  Ihortncs  of  breath,  to  be  taken  T^hewms, 
morning  and  evening;  it  alfo  provokerh  Urin  Vrine, 
and  hclpeth  to  break  the  Stone,  and  expel  the  Stone, 
Grcavell  from  the  Kidneys,  procuereth  wo-  Gravel, 
mens  Courfes,  and  expelleth  the  dead  birth; 
is  Angular  good  for  ithc  llrangling  of  the  Conrfes, 
Mother,  and  other  fuch  like  Feminine  Dif-  Bead 
cafes.  It  is  effcdluall  alfo  a|anift  the  Dropfic,  Child, 
Cramps,^  and  the  Falling  ficknes,  for  the  de-  Mother, 
cedlion  in  wine  being  gargled  in  the  Mouth 
,  draweth  down  much  water  and  fiegm  from  Cramps, & 
the  brain,  purging  &  cafing  it  of  what  oppref-  ¥  ailing- 
feth  it.  It  is  of  a  rare  quality  againft  al  forts  of  JickneX 
cold  poyfon,  to  be  taken  as  there  is  caufe,  It  Cold 
provoketh  fweat.  But  left  the  taft  hcrof,  or  of  Poyfons, 
the  feed  (which  vtorketh  to  the  like  effed  Sweat, 
though  not  fo  powerfully)  (hould  be  too  of- 
fenfive;  the  beft  way  is  to  take  the  water 
diftillcd  both  from  the  Herb  and  Root.  The 
juyee  herof  dropped  or  Tents  dipped  therin, 
and  applyed  either  to  green  wounds,  or  flthy  Green 
rotten  Ulcers  and  thole  that  come  by  imeno- Wounds, 
med  Weapons,  doth  fcon  clenfand  heal  them.  Rotten 
or  ifthey  be  bathed  with  the  diftillcd  water,  it  leers. 
The  fame  is  alfo  very  good  to  help  the  Gout  Gout. 
coming  of  a  cold  caufe. 

It  is  an  Herb  of  Mars. 

Sweet  Maudlin 

Defeription. 

COmmem  C^laudlm  have  fomwhat  long 
and  narrow  Leaves,  fnip'd  about  the 
edges:  the  ftalks  are  two  foot  high,  bearing  at 
21  i  the 


I 


8o 


The  EngUJh  Thyjitian. 


the  tppps  many  yellow  flowers  Set  round  to¬ 
other  and  all  of  an  equal  height,  in  umbles 

tufts  like  unto  Tanfy  after  which  flowereth 
fmall  whitilh  Seed  almofl:  as  big  as  Wormieed 
The  whol  Herb  is  fweet  and  bitter. 

Vlace  and  Time-  . 

It  groweth  in  Gardens^)  and  flowreth  in 
June  and  July. 

Venues  and  Uje.. 

The  Vertues  hereof  being  the  fame  with 
Coftmary,  or  Alecoft,  1  fhal  not  trouble  you 
to  make  any  repetition  thereof,  left  my  Book 
grow  too  big  :  but  rather  refer  you  unto  Colt- 
mary  for  fatisfaftion. 

The  Medlar, 


fluxes 

Stayeth 

Womens 

Longings 

Hinders 

Mifcar- 

riagej 

Cftrglfj 


womens 

CourjeSi 

VileSi 


Hefenpion. 

THis  Tree  groweth  neer  the  bignefs  of 
the  Quince  Tree,  fpreading  Branches 
reafonable  large,  with  longer  and  narrower 
Leaves  than  either  the  Apple  or  Quince,  and 

Tiotdentcdaboutthe  edges ;  Attheend  of  the 
Sprigs  ftand  the  Blowers  made  of  Bive  white, 
great  broad 'pointed  Lcavs,  nicked  inthe  mid¬ 
dle,  with  feme  white  threds  alfo ;  after  which 
comeththe  Bruit,  of  a  brownifh  green  colom, 
beingripe,bcaringaCrown  as  it  were  on  t  e 
top,  which  were  the  five  green  Leaves,  and 
being  rubbed  offer  Wien  away,  the  head  of 
theBruitisfeentobefomwhat  hollow.  The 
Lruit  is  very  harfti  before  it  be  mellowed,  and 
bath  ufuaily  five  hard  Kernels  within  it.  ^ 
There  is  another  kind  hereof  differing 

nothing  frbm  the  former ,  but  that  it 

hath  fome  Thorns  on  it  in 

which  the  other  hath  not,  and  the  Bruit  is 

fmalandnotfopleafant. 

Time. 

They  grow  in  this*Land-,  and  Blower  in 

■  May  for  the  moft  part,  and  bear  ripe  Bruit  in 

September 3  iniO^ober. 

Venues  and  Ufe. 

They  are  very  powerful  to  ftay  any  Bluxes 
of  Blood  or  Humors  in  Man  or  Woman  :  the 
Leavs  have  alfo  the  like  qu^ity.  The  Brui 
eaten  by  Women  with  Child,  ftaycth  then 
longings  after  unufual  meats,  and  is  very  c  - 

fedual  for  them  that  are  apt  to  m^y,  and 

be  delivered  before  their  time,to  help 
lady,  and  make  them  joyful  Mothers.  1  ht 
Decodion  of  them  is  good  to  gargle  and  wafh 
the  Mouth,  Throat  and  Tceth,_when  there  is 
any  defluxion  of  Blood  to  ftay  it,  or  of  u- 
mors,  which  caufeth  Pains  and  Swellings . 
It  is  a  good  bath  for  Women  to  fit  over  that 
have  their  Courfes  flow  too  abundantly  i  or 

the  Piles  when  they  bleed  too  much,  it  a 

Pultis  or  Plaifter  be  made  with  dried 
beaten  and  mixed  with  the  juyee  of  red  Rofes, 


whereunto  a  few  Cloves  and  Nutmeg  may  be 
added,  and  a  little  red  Corrcl  alfo,  and  appli¬ 
ed  to  the  Stomach  that  is  given  to  calling,  or 
loathing  of  meat,  it  efteftually  helpeth.  The  Loathing 
dried  Le.avs  in  Pouder,  ftrewedon  frelh,  bice-  of  Meat, 
ding  Wounds,  reftraineth  the  Blood ,  and  or  Caftiug, 
healeth  up  the  Wound  quickly  :  The  Medlar  Bleeding, 
ftones  made  into  Pouder  and  drunk  in  Wine,  P'/"# 
wherein  feme  Parfley  Roots  have  lien  infufed  Hounds, 
all  night,  or  a  little  boyled,do  brealc  the  Stone  ^one  in  the 
in  the  Kidneys,  helping  to  expel  it.  '  j^iemeys. 

The  Bruit  is  old  Saturns,  and  furc  a  better 
Medicine  he  hardly  hath  to  ftrengthen  the  re¬ 
tentive  faculty  5  therfore  it  'ftaics  Womens 
Longings,  the  good  old  Man  cannot  endure 
Womens  minds  Ihould  run  a  gadding  :  Alfo 
a  Plaifter  made  of  the  Bruit  dried  before  they 
be  rotten,  and  other  convenient  things,  and 
applied  to  the  Reins  of  the  Back,  flops  Mif- yj/iyirar- 
carriage  in  Women  with  Child.  riage. 


Melilot,  or  Kings 
Claver. 

Dejcriptim. 

THis  hath  many  green  Stalks  two  or  three 
foot  high',  rifing  from  a  tough  long 
white  Root,  vvhich  dieth  not  every  yeer  i  fee 
round  about  at  the  Joynts  with  final  and  fom- 
what  long  welfmelling  Leavs  fet  three  toge¬ 
ther,  unevenly  dented  about  the  edges;  The 
Blowers  are  yellow,  and  well  fmclling  alfo, 
made  like  other  Trefoyls,  but  final,  ftanding 
in  long  Spikes,  one  above  another,  for  an 
hand  breath  long,  or  better,  which  afterwards 

turn  into  long  crooked  Cods,  wherein  is  con¬ 
tained  flat  Seed,  fomwhat  Brown. 

Place. 

It  groweth  plentifully  in  many  places  of 
this  Land,  as  in  the  edg  of  S«M  andin 
Efiex,  as  alfo  in  Huntmtoujhire,  and  in  o- 
ther  places,  W  moft  ufuaily  in  Corn  BieldS, 

in  ccxncrs  of  Meadows. 

Time. 

It  BlowrethinJ/^we  o.ni  July  is  ripe 
quickly  after. 

Vertues  and  vfe. 

Melilot  boyled  in  Wine  and  applied  mollifi- 
eth  all  hard  Tumors  and  Inftamations  that 
happen  in  the  Eyes  or  other  parts  of  the  Body,  Hard, 
asfficBundament:  or  privy  parts  ciUmov7umors& 
Woman*,  and  fomtimes  the  Yolk  In flama- 

Egg,  or  fine  Blower  or  Poppy  See»i,  or_hn- tions  in 
dive  is  added  unto  it :  It  helpeth  the  Iprca- 
dinc^  Ulcers  in  the  Head,  it  being  wafh.cd  mrh  eljwhcre, 
a  Ly  made  thereof  5  It  helpfh  the  pains  of  m 

the  Stomach  being  applied  frefh,  or  boyled 
with  any  of  the  aforenamed  things.  It  helpeth  Sro;»^cn 
alfo  the  pains  of  the  Ears  being  dropped  into  pained, 

^  them } 


The  Englip  Thyfitian. 


8i 


Hiadach, 

U’indi 


them  S  and  fteeped  in  V inegar  and  Rofe-W a- 
tcr  it  niitigateth  the  Headach*  The  Flowers 
of  Melilot  and  Chamomel  are  much  ufcdto  be 
put  together  in  Clifters  to  expelWind,&  to  eaf 
/.fWins  i  alfo  into  Pultices  for  the  fame  purpole, 
and  to.affwagc  Swellings  or  Tumors  in  the 
Spleen  or  other  partsj  &  helpeth  InHamations 
'Z  any  part  of  the  Body.  The  juyee  dropped 
into  the  Eyes  isafingular  good  Medicine  to 
fimfthea  away  any  Film  or  Skin  thitcloudcth  or 
dimmeth  the  Eyefight.  The  Mead  often  wa- 
jtpo^Ufey^  with  the  diftilled  Water  of  the  Herb  and 

Flowers,  or  a  Ly  made  therwith,  is  cffedual 
for  thofe  that  have  fuddenly  loft  their  fenfes  j 
'  as  alfo  to  ftrengthen  the  Memory,  to  comfort 

the  Head  and  Brains,  and  to  preferve  them 
from  pains  and  the  Apoplexie. 


Ftench;,  and  Dogs 
Mercury. 

Vefcriptiori’ 

THis  rifeth  up  with  a  fquare  peen  ftalk 
full  of  Joynts  two  foot  high  or  tner  abouts, 
with  two  Leaves  at  every  Joynt  and  branches 
likewife  from  both  fides  of  the  ftalk,  fet  with 
frefh  green  Leaves  fomwhat  broad  and  longja- 
bout  the  bignefs  of  the  Leaves  of  Baffell  finely 
dented  about  the  edges:  towards  the  topps  of 
the  ftalks  and  branches  come  forth  at  every 
Joynt  in  the  Male  Mercury  two  fmall  round 
green  heads,  ftanding  together  upon  a  ftiort 
footftaik  which  growing  ripe  are  the  feedsj  not 
having  any  Flower  :  In  the  females  The 
ftalk  is  longer,  fpike  faftiion,  fet  round  about 
with  final  green  husks,  which  are  the  Flowers 
made  like  final  branches  of  Grapes  which 


lour,  and  lefs  dented  or  foip’d  about  the  edges: 

At  the  Joynts  with  the  Leavs  come  forth  lon¬ 
ger  5talks  than  the  former,  with  two  hairy 
round  Seeds  upon  them  twice  as  big  as  thofe 
of  the  former  Mercury  :  The  taft  hereof  is 
Herby ,  and  the  fine!  fomwhat  ftrong 
and  Viruleht  :  The  Female  hath  much 
harder  Leavs  ftanding  upon  longer  Foot- 
ftalks,  arid  the  ftalks  are  alfo  longer  :  From 
the  Joynts  come  forth  Spikes  of  Flowers,  like 
the  French  Female  Mercury ,  The  Roots  of 
them  both  are  many,  arid  full  of  final  Fibres, 
which  run  under  ground,  and  mat  themfelves 
very  much,  not  perifhing  as  the  former  Mcr-  , 

curies  do,  but  abiding  the  Winter,  and  ftioot 
forth  new  Branches  every  yeer  (for  the  old  die 
down  to  the  ground- 

Vlacc. 

The  Male  and  Female  French  Mercury  are 
found  wild  in  diverf  places  of  this  Landj  as 
by  a  Village  called  Brool{land  in  'Bjimney 
Marfh  in  TT^nt. 

The  Dogs  Mercury  in  fundry  places  of  T^nt 
alfo,  and  elfwhere  j  but  the  Female  more  fel- 
dom  than  the  Male.  ' 

Time. 

They  flourilh  in  the  Summer  months,  and 
therein  give  their  Seed. 

Venues  and  vfe. 

The  Deco<ftic)n  of  the  Leavs  of  Mercury^ 
or  the  Juyee  thereof  in  Broth,or  Drunk  witfi  a 
little  Sugar  put  to  it,  purgeth  Chollerick  and  purgeth 
waterifh  Humors.  Hippocrates  commtndcth  choUeruk 
it  wonderfully  for  Womens  Difeafes  j  and  ap-  Humor Sy 
plied  it  to  the  fecret  parts  to  eaf  the  pains  of  v/omens 
the  Mother  j  and  ufed  the  Decodion  of  it jicl^ne(?y 
both  to  procure  Womens  Courfes,  and  tp  ex-  Mother, 
pel  the  Afterbirth :  And  gave  the  Decoftion  womens 
thereof  with  Mirth  or  Pepper,  or  ufed  to  ap-  Cqurfes, 
ply  the  Leavs  outwardly  againft  the  Strangu-  fffangury, 
ry,  and  Difeafes  of  the  Reins  and  Bladder.  He  Eyes, 


ive  no  feed ,  but  abide  long  upon  the  j  ufed  it  alfo  for  lore  and  watering  Eyes,  and 


alks  without  (bedding  :  The  Rootiscom- 
pofed  of  manyfmalFibreSjWhich  perilheth  eve¬ 
ry  year  at  the  firft  approachtof  winter,  and  fi- 
feth  again  of  its  own  fowing,and  where  it  once 
if  fufltered  to  fow  it  felf,  the  ground  will  never 
want  it  afterwards  even  both  forts  of  it» 

Dogs  Mercury* 

T)ifcription> 

HAving  deferibed  unto  you  that  which  is 
called  French  Mercu'y,  I  come  now  to 
(hew  you  in  a  Defeription  this  kind  alfo. 

This  is  likewife  of  two  kinds,  Male  and  Fe- 
male,haYing  manyftalks  flenderer&lower  than 
Mercury  and  without  any  branches  at  all  upon 
them  :  The  Male  is  fet  with  two  Leavs  at  c- 
very  Joynt  fomwhat  greater  than  the  Female, 
but  more  pointed  and  full  of  Veins,  aad  fom¬ 
what  harder  in  handling,  of  a  darker  green  co- 


cesy 


for  the  Deafnefs  and  pain  in  the  Ears,by  drop-  iftegm, 
ping  the  Juyee  therot  into  them,  and  bathing  Rhewms 
them  afterwards  in  white  Wine. 

The  Decoftion  thereof  made  with  Wa;er  catarrhes, 
and  a  Cock  Chicken,  is  a  moft  fafe  Medicine  Melan- 
againft  the  hot  fits  of  Agues  :  It  alfo  clenfeth  ^oUy 
the  Bread:  and  Lungs  of  Flegm,  but  a  littie  Humors, 
offendeth  the  Stomach  :  The  Joyce  or  diftil- 
ledWater  fnuffed  up  into  the  Noitrils  purgeth 
the  Head  and  Eyes  of  Catarrhes  and  Rhewms. 

Some  life  to  drink  two  or  three  ounces  of  the 
diftilled  water  with  a  little  Sugar  put  to  it,  in 
the  morning  fading,  to  open  and  purge  the 
Body  of  grofs  vifcuous  and  Melancholly  Hu¬ 
mors.  It  is  wonderful  (if  it  be  not  Fabu¬ 
lous)  that  Diofeorides  and  Theophraftus  do 
relate  of  it  :  That  if  Women  ufe  thefe 

Herbs  either  inwardly  or  outwardly  for  three 
daies  together  after  Conception,  and  their 
Courfes  be  paft,  they  (hal  bring  forth  Male  or 
Female  Children,  according  to  that  kind  of 


A  a 


Herb 


I 


8i 


TelloTV 

Jaundice  3 
Warts, 

Sea  bs, 

Tetters^e^ 

Rinf- 

worrns, 

SypeUinzs, 

Infiamatb' 

ons, 

Water'yJ 
&  i/Ldoji- 
chob 
Humors- 


i 


Vrove\e5 

Venery,  ’ 

(layeth 

Vomiting 

Allayeti) 

ChoUer, 

Jmpofiumi 

greai 

Breads, 

Mad  Dogs 

biting. 

Tains  of 

the  Ears, 


The  Englijh  Thy  fit  tan. 


Hcib  they  ufc.  >Maihioluf  faiifc.  That  the  andtaketh  away  the  rciighnefs  of  theTcngi' 
Seedofboth  the  Male  and  Female  Mercury 
•boyled  with  Wormwood  and  drunk,  cureih 
the  yellow  Jaundice  ,  in  a  fpeedy  •  manner : 

The  Leavsorthe  juyee rubbed  upon  Warts, 
take  th  them  away  :  Thejuyee  mingled  with 
fome  Vinegar,  helpeth  all  running  Scabs,Tet- 
ters.  Ringworms  and  the  Itch.  G.alcn  faith 
that  being  applied  in  manner  of  a  Pultis,  to  a- 
ny  Swelling  or  Inflamation,  it  digefleth  the 
Swelling  and  allayeth  the  Inflamation  s  and 
is  therfore  given  in  Clyfters  to  evacuate  the 
Belly  from  oft'enflve  Humors. 


being  rubbed  thereupon.  It  fuffereth  not 
Milk  to  curdle  in  the  Stomach  if  the  Lcavs 
hereof  be  ftceped  or  boyled  in  it  before  you 
drink  it.  Briefly  it  is  very  prcfitfble  to  the 
Stcmach  :  The  often  ufe  hereof  is  a  very  po-  Good  for 
uciftil  Medicine  to  flay  Womens  Courfes^and  the  Slc- 
the  VVhites.  Apply cd  to  the  Forehead  or  mach. 
Temples,  it  cafeth  pains  of  the  Head.  And  is  Pains  of 
good  to  wifli  the  Heads  of  yeng  Children  rbe 
therewith,  againfi:  all  manner  of  breakings  Sores  & 
out.  Sores,  or  Serbs  therein  3  and  healeth  the  Scabs, 
chops  of  the  Fundam  ent.  It  is  alfo  prcfitable  Clfofs  rf 


The  Dogs  Mercury,  although  it  be  lefs  ufed  j  sgainfl  the  Poyfon  of  Vtn:m,ous  Creatures  •  the  Tun- 


yet  may  ferve  in  the  fame  manner  to  the  fam.e 
purpofe  to  purge  waterifh  and  Melanchollick 
Humors. 

Mercury  Oxey.  fay  owns  this  Herb,  but  I  ra- 
■ther  think  ’tis  V enus,  and  am  partly  confident 
of  it  too,  for  I  never  read  that  Mercury  ever 
minded  Womens  bufinclfes  fo  much,  Ibeleev 
he  minds  his  ftudy  more. 


The  diflilled  Water  ciCMinis  is  available  to  dament, 
all  the  puinofes  aforefaid,  yet  m.ore  weakly.  Toyftn, 
But  it  a  Spirit  thereof  be  rightly  and  Chimi- 
cally  drawn,  it  is  much  more  powerful  than  the 
Herb  itfelf.  Simecn  Sethi  faiihj  It  helpeth  a 
cold  Liver,  ftrengthneth  the  Belly  and  Sto-  helpeth 
mach,  caufeth  digeflion,  ftaieth  Vomit  and  ^^d 
the  Hiccough,  is'good  againft  the  Gnawings 
of  the  Heart,  provoketh  Appetite,takcth  away 
Obftrtidicns  of  the  Liver, and  ftirreth  up  Bo- 
dily  Luft  :  But  thereof  too  much  muft  not  be  ic- 
taken',  becaufit  maketh  the  Blood  thin  and 
wheyifh,and  turneth  it  into  Choller,and  ther-  f'^ovolietb 
fore  Chollerick  perfons  muft  cbflain  from  it. 

It  is  is  a  fafe  Medicine  for  the  biting  of 

OF  all  the  kinds  oi"^ints,  the  Spear-  Mad  Dog,  being  brnifed  with  Salt  and  laid 
Mint  or  Heart-Mint,  being  moft  ufe-  thereon.  The  Pouder  of  it  being  dried  and 

taken  after  Meat  helpeth  digeftion,  and  thofe 
that  are  Splenetick  :  taken  with  Wine 

long,  uuc  tJiiiowiui  »  j  peth  Wom-en  in  their  Sore  Travail  in  Child-  hiead, 

.ad^k  green  colour.  The  Flowers  ftancl  in  bearings  It  is  good  againft  the  Gravel  ^ 

Spiked  Heads  at  the  tops  of  the  Branches,  be-  [  and  Stone  in  the  Kidneys,  and  the  Strangury.  , 

ing  of  a  pale  bliifh  colour.  The  fmcl  or  feent  Being  fmelled  unto,  it  is  comfortable  for  the  ^ 

"  '  T,  n-i .  T  Head  and  Memory.  The  Decedion  thereof^  ^ 

gargled  in  the  Mouth  cureth  the  Gum  s  and 
Mouth  that  is  fore,  and  mendeth  an  ill  favou¬ 
red  Breath  :  as  alfo  with  Rue  and  Coriander, 
caufeth  the  Pallat  of  the  Mouth  that  is  down 
to  return  to  his  place,  the  Dccodion  being 
gargled  and  held  in  the  Mouth. 

The  VertuesJir the  wild  or  Yiort  -Mints, 
fuch  as  grow  in  Ditches  (w  hofe  Deferiptien 
I  purpofely  omitted  in  regard  they  are  well  e- 
nough  known)  arc  efpecially  to  diffolve  wind  wind, 
in  the  Stomach,  to  help  the  Chollick,  and  Venereal 
thofe  that  are  fhort  winded,  and  are  an  efpccial  'Dreams, 
Remedy  for  thofe  that  haveVenerious  Dreams  ^  Nightly 


^  ,4?  ^ ‘I' ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  4* ‘I’ ^ 
Mint- 

Defeription'. 

iV  all  the  kinds  of the  Spear- 
_  Mint  or  Heart-Mint,  being  moft  ufe- 
iful  j  I  fhal  only  deferibe  it :  as  followeth. 

hathdiverf  round  Stalks,  and 
long,  but  narroWifh  Lcavs  fet  thereon  3  of  a  1 

.^1  1  C.  A  1  ^  aw  J  L  A  M 


M  —  -w— _  w  - -  — 

hereof  is  fomwhat  necr  unto  Baffil  f  It  en- 
creafeth  by  the  Root  under  ground,  as  all  the 
others  do. 

Place. 

It  is  an  ufual  Inhabitant  in  Gardens  5  And 
‘becaufit  feldom  giveth  any  good  Seed,  the 
defeft  is  rccompenfed  by  the  plentiful  encreaf 
ofl  the.  Root,  which  being  once  planted  in  a 
Garden  will  hardly  be  rid  out  again. 

Time. 

■  It  Flowreth  not  until  the  beginning  of  Au- 
guf,  for  the  moft  part. 

Vertues  and  Vfe. 

Dio/fovides  faith.  It  hath  an  heating,  bin¬ 
ding  and  drying  qufility,  and  therefore  the  ;  and  pollutions  in  the  Night  being  outwardly 
juyee  taken  with  Vinegar  ftaieth  Bleeding  :  applied  to  the  Tefticles  or  Cods.  The  Juyee  Ears 
It  ftirreth  up  Venery  or  Bodily  luft :  Two  or  dropped  ipto  theEars  eafeth  the  pains  cifthem,  pained, 
three  Branches  thereof  taken  with  the  Juyee  of ;  and  deftroyeth  the  Worms  that  breed  therein,  biting  of 
fowr  Pomegranates  fiayeth  the  Hiccough, Vo-  |  They  are  good  againft  the  Venemous  biting  Serpfwrr, 
mitinc,  and  allayeth  Choller :  It  dilfolveth  ;  of  Serpents.  TheJuycelaidonwarmheipethj^iw^rf- 
Impoftumes  being  laid  too  with  Barley  Meal.  !  the  King,s  Evil,  or  Ka  ncls  in  the  Throat :  t  i/. 

It  is  good  to  'I'eprefs  the  Milk  in  Womens'  The  DeceftionOr  diftilled  Water  helpeth  eiftinliing 
Breafts,  and  for  fuch  as  have  fwollen, flagging,  ftrinking  Breath  proceeding  from  the  corrupti-  Breath, 
or  great  Breafts :  applied  with  Salt,  it  helpeth  on  of  the  Teeth  3  snd  fnv.ffcd  up  into  the 
the  biting  of  a  Mad  Dog  3  with  Mead  or  Ho-  Nofe  purgeth  the  Head.  P/h?y  khh,  Thnt 
neyed  Water  j  it  eafeth  the  pains  of  the  Ears,  eating  of  the  Lcavs  hath  been  found  by  expe¬ 
rience 


rience  to  cure  the  Lepry,  and  applying  Tome 
of  them  to  'he  Face :  and  to  help  the  Scurf  ot 
Ditidrif.  Dandrif  of  the  Head  ufed  with  V inegar. 

They  arc  extream  bad  for  wounded  people, 
and  they  fay  a  wounded  man  that  cats  Mints 


the  Falljn^-fickncfs,  Apoplexie,  and  Palfic  Apoplexy^ 
very  fpecdily,  not  only  to  be  inwardly  taker,  Pdjty, 
but  to  be  hnng  at  their  Necks.  Tyagus  faith. 

That  the  frelh  Wood  of  any  Miflato  bruifed, 

_ _  _ _  _  and  the  juyee  drawn  forth  and  dropped  into 

his  Wound  will  never  be  cured,  and  that’s  a  1  the  Ears  thar  have  Impolfumes  in  them,  doth 

help  and  eaf  them  within  a  few  dates. 

That  it  is  under  the  Dominion  of  the  S«», 

I  do  not  queftion,  and  can  alfo  take  for  gran¬ 
ted  that  that  which  grows  upon  Oaks  partici-' 
pates  fomthing  of  the  Nature  of  fupiter^  be- 
caufan  Oak  is  one  of  his  Trees  j  as  alfo  that 
which  grow  s  upon  Pear-trees  and  Apple-trees, 
participates  fomthing  of  the  Nature,  becauf 


long  day 


■I' ‘I’  4''  ^  ‘t’  •  ‘2?  ‘I’  j  *1? 
Miflelto. 


T 


Defcriptien- 

Hisrlfeth  up  from  the  Branch  or  Arm  |  rules  the  Trees,  and  it  draws  fap  from  the 
of  the  Tree  w  hereon  it  groweth,  w  ith  ~  • 


woody  Stem,  parting  it  felf  into  fundry  Bran¬ 
ches,  and  they  again  devided  into  many  other 
Imaller  Twigs,  interlacing  themfclves  one 
within  another ,  very  much  covered  with  a 
grayifh  green  Bark,  having  two  Leaves  fet  at 
every  Joynt,  and  at  rhe  end  likewife,  which 
are  fomw  hat  long  and  narrow, final  at  the  bot- 
but  broader  toward  the  end  .  At  the 


tom 


Knots  or  Joynts  of  the  Boughs  and  Branches, 
orow  final  yellowiih  Flowers,  which  turn  into 
final  found  w'hite  tranfparant  Berries  three  or 
four  together,  full  of  glutinous  moifture,  with 
a  blackifti  Seed  in  every  of  them ,  which 
was  never  yet  known  to  fpring  being  put  into 
the.  ground  or  any  where  elf  to  grow. 

Place. 

It  grdweth  very  rarely  on  Oaks  with  us,  but 
upon  fundry  other,  as  well  Timber  as  Fruit- 
Trees,  plentifully  in  Woods,  Groves,  and  the 
like  thiough  all  this  Land. 

Time. 

It  Flowrcih  in  the  Spring  time,  bat  the  Ber¬ 
ries  be  not  ripe  until  OStobefy  and  abide  on 
the  Branches  all  the  Winter,  uhlefs  the  Black- 
Birds,  and  other  Birds  do  devour  them. 
f^ertues  and  Vfe. 

Both  the  Leavs  and  Berries  of  Mifleto  do 
heat  and  dry,  and  are  of  fubtil  parts  :  The 
Birdlime  doth  mollifie  hard  Knots,  Tumors, 

impollums  I>r.pofluit,cs,ripencth  and  difcirnh  them; 

^  and  draweth  forth  thick  as  well  as  thin  Hu¬ 
mors  from  the  remote  places  of  the  Body,  di- 
gefting  and  feparg:tingthem  :  And  being  mix¬ 
ed  with  equal  pans  of  Roxin  and  Wax,  doth 
mollifie  the  hardnefs  of  the  Spken,  and  hea- 
leth  old  Ulcers  and  Sores :  Being  mixed  with 
Sandarack,  and  Ortment,  ithelpeth  to  draw 
off  foul  Nails  t  and  if  quicklime  and  Wine 
Lees  be  added  thereunto  it  worketh  the  ftron- 
gcr.  The  ^Mipieto  It  felf  of  the  Oak  (as  the 
beft)  made  into  Ponder  and  given  in  drink  to  ^ 
thole  that  have  the  Fallirg-ficknefs,  doth  allu- 
rcdly  heal  them  as  Mathiolns  faith,  but  it  is 
fit  to  ufe  it  for  fony  dales  together.  Some 
have  fo  highly  efteemed  of  the  Vertues  hereof 
that  they  have  called  it  Lignum  SanShe  Criicisy 
Wood  of  the  holy  Crofs;  bcleeving  it  to  help 


Trees,  it  grows  upon  having  no  Root  of  its 
own,  but  why  that  fhonild  have  moft  vertues 
that  grows  upon  Oaks  I  know  not,  unlefs  be¬ 
cauf ’tis  rareft,  andhardeft  to  come  by,  and 
our  Colleciges  Opinion  is  in  this  contrary  to 
the  Scripture  which  faith.  Cods  tendei  Mer-’ 
ties  arc  over  all  his  H  o>\s,  and  fo  ’tis.  Let  the 
Collcdg  of  Phyfitians  walk  51s  contrary  to 
him  as  they  pleaf,  and  that’s  as  contrary  as 
the  Eaft  is  to  the  Weft.  Cliijius  affirms  that 
which  grows  upon  Pear-trees  to  be  as  preva¬ 
lent,  and  give  order  that  it  ftiould  not  touch 
the  ground  after  it  is  gathered,  and  alfo  faith. 
That  being  hung  about  the  Neck,  it  remedies 
Witchcraft. 


Spleen  t 
Vlcersy 


Falling- 


Money- wort^  or  Herb 
Two*pence. 

T)e[cripthn, 

THc  common  Moncy-worty  fendeth  forth 
from  a  final  threddy  Root,  diverf  long, 
Veak,and  {lender  Branches  lying  and  running 
upon  the  ground  two  or  three  Foot  long  nr 
more,  fet  with  Leavs  two  at  a  Joynt  one  a- 
gainft  another  at  equal  diffances,  which  are 
almbft  round,  but  pointed  at  the  ends,  fmooth 
and  of  a  good  green  colour:  At  the  Joynts 
with  the  Leavs  from  the  middle  forward  come 
forth  at  every  Joynt  fomtimes  one  yellow 
Flower,  and  fomtimes  two,  {landing  each  on 
a  final  Footftalk,  and  made  of  five  Leavs,  nar¬ 
row,  and  pointed  at  the  ends,  with  fome  yel¬ 
low  threds  fn  the  middle  :  which  being  pail, 
there  ftand  in  their  places  final  round  Heads 
of  Seed. 

Place. 

It  groweth  plentifully  in  almoil  all  places  of 
this  Land ;  commonly  in  moift  grounds 
by  Hedg  fides,  and  in  the  middle  of  graify 
Fields. 

.  Time. 

They  Flower  in  June  ani  Jidyy  and  their 
Seed  is  ripe  quickly  aftert 
A  a  i  VcrtiiCi 


84 


The  E)t^ltjh  ThjiJltian. 


Venues  mid  u[e. 

MoTieyn’ort  is  fingular  good  to  ftay  all  Flu¬ 
xes  in  Men  or  Womanowhether  they  be  Lasks, 
Tluxesy  Bloody  Fluxes,  the  Flowing  of  Womens 
Ulcers^  Courfes,  Bleedings  inwardly  or  outwardly. 
Green  and  the  weaknefs  of  the  Stomach  that  is  given 
Wounds  to  calling*  It  is  very  good  alfo  for  all  Ulceis, 
Oldulcers-  or  Excoriations  of  the  Lungs  or  other  in¬ 
ward  parts.  It  is  exceeding  good  for  all 
Wounds,  either  frcfh  or  green  to  heal  them 
fpeedily  s  and  for  old  Ulcers  that  are  of  a 
Ipreadine  nature  :  For  all  which  purpofes. 
The  JuyceoftheHerb,  orthePouder  drunk 
in  Water,  wherein  hot  Steel  hath  been  often 
Quenched  ■  -Or  -the  DccoUion  of  the  green 
Herb  in  Wine  or  Water  drunk  5  Or  the  Seed, 
Juyce  or  Decoftion  ufed  to  the  outward  places 
to  walh  or  bath  them,  or  to  have  Tents  dipped 
therein  and  put  into  them,  are  effeAual. 

♦ 

Moonwon. 

Vefiription. 

his  rifeth  up  ufually  but  with  oncdark 
green  thick  and  fat  Leaf  Handing  upon  a 
fhort  footllalk,not  a  bove  two  fingers  breadths 
but  when  it  will  flower  it  may  be  faid  to  beaix 
a  fmall  flender  ftalk  about  four  or  five  Inches 
high,  having  but  one  leaf  fetin  the  middle 
therof,w‘^‘^  is  much  devided  on  both  fides  into 
fomtimes  five  or  feven  parts  on  a  fid,fomtimes 
jjjore,  each  of  which  parts  is  fmall  next  the 
middle  rib,  but  broad  forwards  and  round 
pointed,  refcmbling  therein  an  half  Moon 
from  whence  it  took  the  name,  the  uppermoft 
parts  or  divifions  being  Icfs  than  the  lowcll  : 
The  Stalk  rifeth  above  this  Leaf  two  or  three 
inches,  bearing  many  Branches  of  fmall  lon^ 
|j|L  Tongues,  every  one  like  the  fpiky  Head  or 
*  Adders-T ongue,  of  a  brownilh  colour,  which 
•whether  I  fhall  call  them  Flowers  or  the 
Seed,  I  well  know  not  *.  which  after*  they 
have  continued  a  while  rcfolve  into  a  Mealy  I 
duft  ;  The  Root  is  fmal  and  Fibrous.  This  | 
hath  fomtimes  diverf  fuch  like  Leavs  as  arebe- 
fore  Dcfcribed,  with  fo  many  branches  or  tops 
arifing  from  one  Stalk  each  devided  from  the 
other.  ^  « 

Place. 

It  groweth  on  Hills,  and  Heaths,  yet  where 
there  is  much  Grafs,  for  therein  it  delighteth 
40  grow.  . 

Tim. 

It  is  to  be  found  only  in  .April  and  May^ 
for  in  June  when  any  hot  weather  coroeth  for 
the  moft  part  it  is  withered  and  gone- 
Vertues  and  ufe. 

Moonwort  is  cold  and  drying  more  than 
Addeis-ton?ue  j  and  is  therefore  held  to  be 
more  availji^jle  for  all  Wounds  both  inward 


and  outward  :  The  Leavs  boyled  in  red  Wine 
and  drunk  ftayeth  the  immoderate  Flux  of 
Womens  Courfes  and  the  Whites :  It  alfo 
ftaieth  Bleeding,  Vomitings,  and  other  Flu-  f^uurfesj 
xes  j  It  helpeth  all  Blows  and  Bruifes,  and  BleedwgSj 
to  confolidate  all  Fraftures  and  Diflocations.  f^otmtingy 
It  is  good  for  Ruptures ;  But  it  is  chiefly  ufed 
by  moft,  with  other  Herbs  to  make  Oyls  or  & 

Balfoms  to  heal  frefh  or  green  Wounds  (as  I  disjoynted 
faid  before)  either  inward  or  outward,  for 
which  it  is  excellent  good.  Green 

Moonvasrt  is  an  Herb  which  they  fay  will  o- 
pen  Locks,  and  unftioo  fuch  Horfes  as  tread 
upon  it,  this  fome  laugh  to  fcorn,  and  thofe 
no  fmal  Fools  neither,  but  Country  people 
that  I  know,  call  it  [Unftioo  the  Horfe]  bc- 
fides  I  have  heard  Commanders  fay.  That  on 
White  Down  in  Deiion.  neer  Tiverton,  there 
was  found  thirty  Horflhoos,  pulled  off  from 
the  feet  of  the  Earl  of  Ejfex  his  Horfes  being 
there  drawn  up  in  a  Body,  many  of  them  be¬ 
ing  but  newly  fhod,  and  no  reafon  known, 
which  caufed  much  admiration  5  and  the  Herb 
deferibed  ufually  grows  upon  Heaths.  The 
Moon  owns  the  Herb. 

Mofles. 

IShal  not  trouble  the  Reader  with  any  Dc- 
fcription.of  thefe,  fith  my  intekt  is  to  (peak 
only  of  two  kinds  as  the  moft  principal,  Vi\. 
Ground-^MoJi,  and  Tree-CMof ,  both  which  . 

are  very  well  know. 

Tlace. 

'ThtGromd-Mo^,  gKJwing  in  our  moift 
Woods,  and  the  bottoms  of  Hills,  in  boggy/  “ 

grounds,  and  iniltadowy  Ditches,  and  many 
other  fu^  like  places. 

'Th&Tree-Mo^  gvoweth.only  on  Trees. 

Vertues  and  Ufc.  . 

The  Ground-M(Jl,  is  iield  to  be,  lingular 
good  to  break  the  Stont^-  and  to  expel  and  , 

drive  it  forth  by  Urin,  being  boyled  in  Wine 
and  drunk ;  The  Herb  bruifed  and  boyled  in 
Water  and  applied  eafeth  all  Inflamations  and  , 

pains  coming  of  anhot  cauf  j  ^  and  is  therfore 
ufed  to  eafthe.painsofthe  hot  Gout.  ^  Bleeding  * 
The  Tree-Mejfes  are  cooling  and  binding,  ^ 

and  partake  of  a  digefting  and  mollify  ing  qua-^ 
lity  withal,  as  Galen  faith.  But  each  Mofi 
doth  partake  of  the  Nature  of  the  T  ree  from 
whence  it  is  taken  5  therefore  that  of  the  Oak 
is  more  Binding  '  and  is  of  good  efftbl  to  ftay 
Fluxes  in  man  or  Womans  as  alfo  V omitings 
or  Bleedings,  the  Pouder  thereof  being  taken 
in  Wine :  "The  Decoftion  thereof  in  Wine  is 
very  good  for  Women  to  be  bathed  with,  or 
to  fit  in  that  axe  troubled  with  the  overflowing 
of  their  Courles :  The  fame  being  drunk  ftay¬ 
eth  the  Stomach  that  is  troubled  with  calling, 

oc 


'The  EngliJh  ^hj/Jitian. 


85 


Dro^ftCi 


Headachj 


Shiewst 


Sitvau- 

ningsy 
Sore  Tra- 

vaily 

Mother  y 

Ur'mey 

Womens 

CoHrfeSy 

flegmy 

Cold 

Vkgmy 


or  the  Hiccouglrj  and  as  Avicenna  faithj  it 
comforteth  the" Heart :  The  Pouder  thereof 
taken  in  Drink  for  fome  time  together,  is 
thought  available  for  the  Dropfic.  The  Oyl 
of  Rofes  that  hath  had  frelh  Mofs  fteeped  ther- 
in  for  a  time,  and  after  boylcd  and  applied  to 
the  Temples  and  Forehead,  doth  Merveilouf- 
ly  caf  the  HAdach  coming  of  a  hdt  'eauf,  as 
alfothe  Diftillations  of  hot  Rhewm  or  Hu¬ 
mors  to  the  Eyes  or  other  parts :  The  Anti- 
ents  much  ufed  it  in  their  Oyntments  and  o- 
ther  Medicines  againft  LafTitude,  and  to 
llrengthen  and  comfort  the  Sinews.  For 
which,  if  it  was  good  then,  I  knpw  no  rcafon 
but  it  may  be  fonnd  fo  ftill. 


to  help  Cramps,  ahd  Convulfions.  '  CrampSy 

Venm  owns  the  Herb,  and  it  is  under  Leo,  Convul- 
there  is  no  better  Herb  to  drive  Melancholly  ficns,  '! 
Vapors  from  the  Heart,  toftrengthen  it,  And  Me/an- 
make  a  merry  cheerful  With  foul,  than  this  choHy 
Herb,  it  may  be  kept  in  a  Syrup  or  Conferve,  Vapors, 
therfore  the  Latins  called  it  Cardiaca:  Bcfidcs, 
it  makes  Women  joyful  Mothers  of  Children, 
and  fettles  their  Wombs  as  they  fhould  be, 
therfore  wc  call  it  Motherwort, 

Moufear. 


Motherwort. 


Difeription, 

THis  hath  a  hard,  fquare,  brownifh,  rough, 
ftrong  Stalk,  riling  three  or  Tour  foot 
high  at  the  leaft,  fpreading  into  many  Bran¬ 
ches,  whereon  grow  Lcavs  ou  each  fide  with 
long  Fpotftalks,  two  at  every  Joynt,  which 
arefomwhat  broad  and  long  as  it  were,  rough, 
or  crumpled,  with  many  great  Veins  therein  3 
of  a  fad  green  colour,  and  deeply  dented  about 
the  edges,  and  almoft  devided :  From  the 
middle  of  the  Branches  up  to  the  tops  of  them 
(which  are  very  long  and  final)  grow  the 
Flowers  round  about  them  at  diltaaces  in 
(harp  pointed  rough  hard  Husks,  of  a  more 
red  or  purple  colour  than  Balm  orHorehound, 
but  in  the  fame  manner  and  form  as  theHore- 
hounds :  after  which  come  final  round  blackilh 
Seed  in  great  plenty  ;  The  Root  fendeth  forth 
a  number  of  long  Strings  and  final  Fibres,  ta¬ 
king  ftrong  hold  in  the  Ground;  of  a  dark 
yellowilh  or  brownifh  colour,  and  abideth  as 
the  Horehound  doth  3  the  fincll  of  this  being 
not  much  different  from  it. 

"Place . 

It  groweeh  ouly  in  Gardens  with  us  in  £«?•- 
land. 

Venues  and  ufe. 

MotbeTWO'cty  is  held  to  be  of  much  ufe  for 
the  trembling  of  the  Heart,  and  in  fairitings 
and  fwounings  from  whence  it  took  the  name 
Cardiaca.  The  Pouder  thereof  to  the  quanti¬ 
ty  of  a  fpoonful  drunk  in  Wine  is  a  wonderful 
help  to  Women  in  their  Sore  Travails,  as  al- 
fo  for  the  fuffocations  or  rifings  of  the  Mo¬ 
ther  3  and  from  thefe  effefts  it  is  likely  it  took 
the  name  of  Motherwort  with  us.  It  ifo  pro- 
voketh  Urine  and  Womens  Courfes,  elenfeth 
the  Cheft  of  cold  Flegm  oppreffing  it,  and 
killeth  the  Worms  in  the  Belly  •  It  is  of  good 
ufe  to  warm  and  dry  up  the  cold  Humors,  to 
digeft  and  difperf them  that  arefetled  in  the 
Veins,  Joyms,  and  Sinews  of  the  Body,  and 


'Deferiptioh,  1 

THis  is  a  low  Herb  creeping  upon  tiie 
ground  by  fmall  firings  like  the  Straw¬ 
berry  Plant,  whereby  it  fhooteth  forth 
fmall  Roots,  whereat  grow  upon  the  Ground 
many  fmall  and  fomwhat  fhort  Leavs  fet  in  9 
round  form  together,  hollowifh  in  the  middle 
where  they  arc  broadeft,  of  an  hoary  colour 
all  over,  and  very  hairy,  which  being  broken 
do  give  a  white  Milk :  From  among  tbefc 
Leavs  fpring  up  two  or  three  final  hoary  Stalks 
about  a  fpan  high,  with  a  few  fmaller  Leavs 
thereon ;  At  the  tops  whereof  ftandeth  ufual- 
ly  but  one  Flower,  confifting  of  many  paler 
yellow  Leavs  broad  at  the  points,  andalittle 
dented  in,  fet  in  three  or  four  rows,  the  grea- 
ter-outermoft,  very  like  a  Dandelyon  Flower, 
and  a  little  reddilh  underneath  about  the  ed¬ 
ges,  elpecially  if  it  gtow  in  a  dry  ground  : 
which  afrer  they  have  ftood  long  in  Flower, 
do  turn  into  Down,  which  with  the  Seed  is 
carry ed  away  with  the  Wind. 

Place. 

It  groweth  on  Ditch  Banks,  and  fomtimes 
in  Ditches  if  they  be  dry  and  in  fandy 
Grounds. 

Time, 

^  ItFlowreth  about ahd/«/y,  and  a- 
bideth  green  all  the  Winter. 

Venues  and  vfe. 

The  juyee  hereof  taken  in  Wine  or  the  De- 
coftion  thereof  drunk  doth  help  the  Jaundice 
although  of  long  continuance,  to  drink  there-  Stone, 
of  morning  and  evening,  and  abftain  from  0-  Belly ach, 
ther  drink  two  or  three  hours  after :  It  is  a  Vropfte, 
fpecial  Remedy  againft  the  Stone,  and  the  f/ux, 
tormenting  pain  S  thereof  3  as  alfo  other  T or-  woundsy 
tures  and  griping  pains  of  the  Bowels  3  The  Bloody 
pecodion  thereof  withSuccory  and  Centaury,  Flux, 
is  held  very  efleftilal  to  help  the  Dropfie,  and  Terms 
them  that  are  inclining  thcrcunto,and  theDif-  flops, 
eafes  of  the  Spleen.  It  ftayeth  the  Fluxes  of 
Blood  either  at  the  Mouth  or  Nofc,  and  in¬ 
ward  Bleedings  alfo ,  for  it  is  a  fingul^ 

Wound  Herb  for  Wounds  both  invvaFd  and 
outward ;  It  helpeth  the  Bloody  Flux  and 
ftayeth  the  abundance  of  Womens  Courfes  : 

B  b  There 


Cough, 

Vhtific^, 

KuftureSy 

CankeY, 

itlcers, 

^reading 

fores. 


terms 
provol(^es, 
Birth, 


Theie  is  a  Syrup  made  of  the  Joyce  hereof  and 
Sugar  by  the  Apothecaries  of  Italy,  and  other 
places^  which  is  of  much  account  with  them, 
to  be  given  to  thofe  that  are  troubled  with  the 
Cough  or  Phtiftck :  The  fame  alfo  is  fmgu- 
lar  good-for  Ruptures  or  l^lrftings.  idie 
green  Herb  bruifed  and  prefently  bound  to  any 
frcfb  cut  or  Wound,  doth  c^uickly  fodcr  the 
lips  thereof*  And  the  Juycc, ‘Decoftion,  or 
Poudcr  of  the  dried  Herb,  is  moft  lingular  to 
ftaythc  Malignity  of  fptcading  and  fretting 
Cankers  and  Ulcers  wherfefoever,  yea  in  the 
Mouth,  dr  feefet  parts :  The  diftilled  Water 
of  the  Plant  is  available  in  all  the  Difeafes  a- 
forefaid,  and  to  walh  outward  W ounds  and 
Sores,  and  to  apply  Tents,  or  Cloaths  wet 
therein. 

The  Moon  owns  the  Herb  alfo,  and  though 
Authors  cry  out  upon  Alrhymifts  for  attenjp” 
ting  to  fix  Quick  Silver  by  this  Herb  and 
Moonwort:  A  Roman  would  not  have  jud¬ 
ged  a  thing  by  the  luccefs,  if  it  be  to  be  fixed 
at  all,  his  by  Lunar  Influence. 

Mugwort 

Vefeription. 

THc  common  Mugtvort  have  divers  Leavs 
lying  upon  the  ground,  very  much 
devided,  or  cut  deeply  in  about  the  Brims 
fomwhat  like  Wormwood  but  mfich  larger,  of 
a  dark  green  colour  on  the  upper  fide  and  very 
hoary  white  underneath.  The  ftalks  rife  to  be 
four  or  five  foot  high,  having  on  it  fuch  like 
Leavs  as  thofe  below,  but  fomwhat  fmallcr, 
branching  forth  very  much  toward  the  top, 
whereon  are  fet  very  final  pale  yellowilh  Flo¬ 
wers  like  Buttons,  which  fall  away,  and  after 
them  come  fmall  Seed  inclofed  in  round 
Heads  :  The  Root  is  long  and  hard  with  ma¬ 
ny  final  Fibres  growing  from  it,  whereby  it 
taketh  flrong  hold  in  the  ground,  but  both 
Stalk  and  Leaf  do  die  down  every  yeer,  and 
the  Root  ftiooteth  anew  in  the  Spring.  The 
whol  Plant  is  of  a  reafonablc  good  feent,  and 
is  more  eafily  propogated  by  the  Slips,  than  by 
the  Seed. 

Place. 

It  groweth  plentifully  in  many  places  of  this 
Land,  by  the  way  fides,  as  alfo  by  final  Water- 
Courfes,  and  in  diverf  other  places* 

Time. 

It  Flowreth  and  Seedeth  in  the  end  of  Sum¬ 
mer. 

Venues  and'Vfe. 

CMugwort  is  with  good  fuccefs  put  among 
other  Herbs  that  are  boyled  for  Women  to  fit 
over  the  hot  Dccodlion,  to  draw  down  their 
Courfes,  to  help  the  Delivery  of  the  Birth, 


Afterbirth  and  expel  the  Aftcrbiith,  as  alfo  for  the  Ob- 


ftruftions  and  Inflamations  of  the  Mother,  tvemb  In- 
It  breaketh  the  Stone,  and  caufeth  one  to  flamed, 
make  water  where  it  is  flopped  :  The  juyee  tf  'ens, 
thereof  made  up  with  Mirth,  and  pat  under  flings 
as  a  Peflary^  worketh  the  fame  effedt,  and  fo  Svtl, 
doth  the  Root  alfo,  being  made  up  with  Hogs  pains  in 
Greafinto  an  Oyntment,  it  taketh  away  Wens  theNec^ 
and  hard  Knots  and  Kernels  thar  grow  about  Opium, 
.the  Neck  and  Throat,  and  eafeth  the  pSiins- Sciatica, 
about  the  Neck  more  effeftually ,  if  Tome  Sinews 
Field  Daifies  be  put  with  it.  The  Herb  it  felf  pained, 
being  frefh  or  the  juyee  thereof  taken,  is  a  fpe-  Cramp, 
cial  Remedy  upon  the  overmuch  taking  of  O- 
pium.  Three  drams  of  the  Pouder  of  the  dri¬ 
ed  Leavs  taken  in  Wine,  is  a  fpeedy  and  the 
beft  certain  help  for  the  Sciatica.  A  Dccofti- 
on  thereof  made  with  Chamomel  and  Agri¬ 
mony,  and  the  place  bathed  therewith  while 
it  is  warm,  taketh  away  the  pains  of  the  Si¬ 
news  and  the  Cramp. 

This  is  an  Herb  of  Venus,  therefore  main- 
taineththe  parts  of  the  Body  fhe  rules,  and 
Remedies  the  Difealcs  of  the  parts  that  are  un¬ 
der  her  Signs,  Taurus  Libra. 

The  Mulberry-Tree. 

> 

THis  is  fo  well  known  in  the  places  where 
it  groweth,  that  it  needeth  no  Deferipti- 
on. 

time. 

It  beareth  Fruit  in  the  Months  of  July  and 
Muguft. 

Vermes  and  vfe. 

The  Mulberry  is  of  different  parts  5  the  ripe 
Berries  by  reafon  of  their  Sweetnefs  and  flip- 
pery  moiflure,  opening  the  Belly,  and  the 
unripe  binding  it ,  elpeciafly  when  they  are  binding, 
dried,  and  then  they  are  good  to  flay  Fluxes,  fluxes, 
Lasks,  and  the  abundance  of  Womens  Cour-  Lasl^f, 
fes.  The  Bark  of  the  Root  killeth  the  broad  Terms 
Worms  in  the  Body.  The  Juyee,  or  the  Sy- 
rup  made  of  the  Juyee  of  the  Berries,  helpeth  jnflamati- 
all  Inflamations  and  Sores  in  the  Mouth  or 
Throat,  and  the  Pallet  of  the  Mouth  when  it  z>vula, 
is  fallen  down.  The  Juyee  of  the  Leavs  is  3.  pQy^2Houth 
Remedy  againft  the  biting  of  Serpents,  and  ^  Throat, 
for  thofe  that  have  taken  Aconite :  The  Leavs  Tooibach,] 
beaten  with  Vinegar  is  good  to  lay  on  any  bleeding, 
place  that  is  burnt  with  fire.  .  A  Decodion  Hmor- 
madc  of  the  Bark  and  Leavs,  is  good  to  walh 
the  Mouth  and  Teeth  when  they  ach.  If  the 
Root  be  a  little  flit  or  cut,  and  a  final  hole 
made  in  the  ground  next  thereunto,  in  the 
Harvefttime,  it  will  give  out  a  certain  Juyee, 
which  being  hardned,  the  next  day  is  of  good 
ulie  to  help  the  Toothach,  to  dillolve  Knots, 
and  purge  the  Belly:  The  Leavs  of  Mulber¬ 
ries  are  faid  to  flay  bleeding  at  Mouth  or 
Nofe,  or  the  Bleeding  of  the  Piles,  or  of  a 

Wound 


n>e  Eiiglip?  Thyptian, 


87 


Actirious 

fccret- 


Wound  being  bound  unto  the  places.  A 
Branch  of  the  Tree  taken  when  the  Moon  is  at 
the  full  and  bound  to  the  Wrift  of’ a  Womans 
Arm  whofe  Courfes  come  down  too  much 
doth  ftay  them  in  a  ihort  fpacc. 

Menitry  rules  the  Tree,  therefore  arc  its  ef- 
fedfs  variable  as  his  are. 

Mullein. 


T 


PefcnptioH- 


doth  eafily  take  them  away  ;  but  doth  no  good 
to  fmooth  Wartsi  The  Poudec  of  the  dried 

Flowers  is  an  efpedal  Rer.iedy  for  .  thofe  that 
are  troubled  with  belly-aches  or  the  pains  of  Belly aebj 
the  Chollick.  The  Decodion  of  the  Root,  Cholliclij 
and  fo  likewife  of  the  Leavs  is  of  great  effeft  Inflamci-- 
to  dilTolvc  the  Tumors,  Swellings,  or  Infla-  iiotip  ■ 
mation  of  the  Throat.  The  Seed  and  Leavs  Tkofns,' 
boyiedinWine,  and: applied,  dra'.veth  forth  Sp/.w^er.fi 
fpeedily  Thorns,  or  Spl inters  gotten  into  the  C  oyls, 
Flefh,  eafefh  the  pains,  and  healeth  them  alfo.  Groyriy 
The  Leavs  bruifed  and  wrapped  in  double  pa-  Ptsjun- 
pers,  and  covered  with  hot  Aflies  arid  'Brn*  iHuics-  - 


bersto  bake  a  while,  and  then  taken  forth  and 
'He  common  white  Mullein  hath  many  1  laid  warm  on  any  Botch  or  Boyl  hapning  in 
fair  large  woolly  white  Leavs  lying  next  1  the  Groyn  or  ftiare,  doth  diffolve  and  heal 


'FluXi  ^ 

Ruptures, 

Cramp, 

Convd- 

fion, 

Cough, 

‘Toothachy 

Hemor¬ 

rhoids, 

Bloody 

Flux, 

CbftrnSli- 

ms. 

Reins, 

Bladder, 

Sinews, 


Gout, 

harts, 


the  i^round,  .fomwhat  longer  than  broad, poin 
ted  at  the  ends,  and  as  it  were  dented  about 
the  edges :  The  Stalk  rifeth  up  to  be  four  or 
five  Foot  high,  covered  over  with  fuch  like 
Leavs,  but  leffer,  fo  that  no  Stalk  can  be  feen 

for  the  multitude  of  Leavs  thereon  up  to  the 
Flowers,  which  come  forth  on  allfides  of  the 
Stalk,  without  any  Branches  for  the  moft  part, 
and  are  many  fet  together  in  a  long  fpike,  in 
fome  of  a  gold  yellow  colour,  in  others 
more  pale,  confiding  of  five  round  pointed 
Leavs,  which  afterwards  give  final  round 
•Heads,  wherein  is  final  brownifh  Seed  contai¬ 
ned:  The  Root  is  long,  white,  and  Woody, 
periftiing  after  it  hath  born  Seed. 

^  'Place,. 

It  groweth  by  the  way  Tides,  and  in  Lancs  in 
many  places  of  this  Land. 

Time' 

It  Flowreth  in  July,  or  thereabouts. 

Venues  and  Ufe. 

A  final  quantity  of  the  Root  given  in  Wine, 
is  commended  by  Piofcorides  againft  Lasks 
and  Fluxes  of  the  Belly :  The  Decoaion 
thereof  drunk  is  profitable  for  thofc  that  are 
Burden,  and  for  Cramps  and  Convulfions, 
and  for  thofe  that  are  troubled  with  an  old 
Cough.  The  Decoftion  thereof  gargled  ea- 
feth  the  pains  of  the  Toothach :  An  Oyl 
made  by  the  often  Infufion  of  the  Flowers,  is 
of  very  good  effeft  for  the  Piles.  The  Deco- 
aionofthe  Root  in  Red  Wine,  or  in  Water 
(ifthere  bean  Ague')  wherein  red  hot  Steel 
hath  been  often  quenched,  doth  day  the-Bloo- 
dy  Flux.  The  fame  alfo  opencth  Obdrufti- 
onsofthe  Bladder  and  Reins  when  one  can¬ 
not  make  water.  A.  Decodion  of  the  Leavs 
hereof,  and  of  Sage,  Marjerom  and  Cambmil 
Flowers  and  the  places  bathed  therewith  that 
have  Sinews  dark  with  cold,  or  Cramps,  d#th 
bring  them. much  eaf,  and  comfort.  Three 
ounces  of  the  didtljed  water  of  the  Flowers 
drunk  morning  and  evening  for  fome  dales  to¬ 
gether  is  faid  to  be  the  mod  excellent  Reme¬ 
dy  for  the  hot  Gout,  The  juyee  of  the  Leavs 
and  Flowers  being  laid  upon  rough  Warts,  as 
alfo  the  Ponder  of  the  dried  Roots  rubbed  on 


them.  The  Seed  bruifed,  and  boyiedinWine 
and  laid  on  any  Member  that  hath  been  o'ut  of 
Joynt  and  is  newly  fet  again,  taketh  away  all 
Swellings  and  pains  thereof.  ^ 

Muftard. 


'Defeription. 

THe  common  Mii^ard  hath  large  and 
broad  rough  Leavs,  very  much  jagged 
with  uneven,  and  nnorderly  games, 
fomwhat  like  Turnip  Leavs,  bat  Icfler  and 
rougher  :  The  Stalk  rifeth  to  be  more  than  a 
foot  high,  and  fomtimes  two  foot  high,  beiug 
found,  rough,  and  branched  at  the  top,  bea¬ 
ring  fuch  like  Leavs  thereon  as  grow  below, 
but  lefler,  and  lefs  devided  5  and  diverf  yel¬ 
low  Flowers  one  above  another  at  the  tops  5 
after  which  come  final  rough  pods ,  with 
final  lank  flat  ends,  wherein  is  contained 
round  ycllowifti  Seed,  ftiarp,  hot,  and  biting 
upon  the  Tongue  :  The  Root  Is  final, 
lortg-j  and  woody,  when  it  beaveth  Stalks 
and  periftieth  every  yeer. 

Place. 

This  groweth  with  us  in  Gardens  qnlyj  and 
other  manured  places. 

Time. 

It  is  an  annual  Plant,  Flowring  in  July, 
and  their  Seed  is  r jpe  in  .<4 ugufi.  ;  ; ' 

Venues  and  ufe,' 

ikftt/idrd  Seed  hath  the  Vertue  of  Heating,  Heats, 
difeufling,  rarefying  and  drawing  but  Splin-  pries, 
ters  of  Bones,  and  other  things  out  df  the  Splinters, 
Flefh.  It  is  of  good  efFeift  to  bring  downWo-  Thorns, 
mens  Courfes,  for  the  Falling  ficknefs.or  Le-  Terms 
thargy,  droufic  forgetful  evil,  to  ufe  it  both  in-  povol{es, 
wardly  and  outwardly  to  rub  the  Noflrils, 

Forchead,  and  Temples,  to  warm  and  quic-  '_/?f^?zcj?, 
ken  the  Spirits,  for  by  the  fierce  ftiarpnefs  it  Lethargy, 
purgeth  the  Brain  by  fiieezing,  and  drawing  Sneering, 
down  Rhewfn  and  other  Vifeuous  Humors, 
which  by  their  Dtftillations  upon  the  Lungs 
and  Cheft  procure  coughing,  and  therefore 
B  b  z  with 


with  fomc  Honey  added  thereto  doth  much 
good  therein.  The  Decodion  of  the  Seed 
Vifuryf  made  in  Wine  and  drunk,  provoketh  Urine, 
Poyf  m,  refifteth  the  force  of  Poyfon,  the  Malignity  of 

Mufhroms  Mufliroms,  and  the  Venom  of  Scorpions,  or 
Vtmmom  other  Venemous  Creatures,  if  it  be  taken  in 
Beaftsf  time :  and  taken  before  the  cold  fits  of  Agues, 
Agues 3  altereth,  lefleneth,  and  cureth  them.  The 

Lufipra-  Seed  taken  either  by  it  felf  or  with,  other 
voliesi  things  cither  in  an  Elcftuary  or  Drink,  doth 
Spleerti  mightily  ftir  up  Bodily  luft,  and  heipcth  the 
WulAi  Spleen  and  pains  in  the  fides,  and  gnawing  in 
Sciatica,  the  Bowels.  Andufed  asa  Gargle,  draweth 
Toothach,  up  the  Pallat  of  the  Mouth  being  fallen  down^ 
Pains,  and  alfo  it  difTolyeth  the  Swellings  about  the 
Hair,  Throat,  if  it  be  outwardly  Japplied.  Being 
Bruifes,  chewed  in  the  Mouth,  it  oftentimes  helpeth 
Blacli  and  the  Toothach  r  The  outward  application 
blue  jpots,  hereof  upon  the  pained  place  of  the  Sciatica, 
Youghnef,  difejufleth  the  Humors,and  eafeth  the  pains,  as 
Leprofie,  ^  slfo  of  the  Gout,and  other  Joynt  aches.  And 
Low  (e  S-  is  much  and  often  ufed  to  eaf  pains  in  the  fides 
'vilMw-  or  loynSj  the  fhoulders  or  other  parts  of  the 
Precipes,'*'  Body,  npon  the  applying  thereof  to  raif  Bli- 
tf'ryNecks-  and  cureth  the  Difeaf  by  drawing  it  to 

the  outward  part  of  the  Body  :  It  is  alfo  u- 
fed  to  help  the  falling  of  the  Hair :  The  Seed 
bruifed,  mixed  with  Honey  and  applied,  or 
made  up  with  Wax,  taketh  away  the  Marks, 
and  black  and  blue  fpots  of  Bruifes  pr  the  like, 
the  roughnefs  or  Scabbednefs  of  the  Skin,  as 
alfo  the  Leprofie  and  lowfie  evil  :  it  helpeth 
alfo  the  crick  in  the  Neck.  The  diftilled  Wa¬ 
ter  ofthe  Herb  when  it  is  in  Flower  is  much 
ufed  to  drink  inwardly  to  help  in  any  the  Dilr- 
cafes  aforefaid,or  to  wafli  the  Mouth  when  the 
Tallat  is  down,  and  for  the  Difeafes  of  the 
Throat  to  gargle,  but  outwardly  alfo  for 
Scabs  ,  Itch,  pr  other  like  Infirmities,  and 
elenfeth  the  Face  from  Morphew,  Spots,  Frec¬ 
kles,  and  other  Deformities. 

It  is  an  cxcelleht  Sawce  for  fuch  whofe 
Blood  wants  clarifying  and  for  weak  Stomachs 
being  an  Herb  of  Mars,  but  naught  for  Chol- 
■lerick  people,  though  as  good  for  fuch  as  are 
aged  or  troubled  with  cold  Difeafes,  Aries 
claims  fomthing  to  do  with  it,  therfore  it 
Ifrengthens  the  heart  and  refiftetfi  poyfon,  let 
fuch  whofe  Stomachs  ''are  fo  weak,  they  can¬ 
not  digeft  their  meat  or  appetite  it,  take  of 
Mufiard  Seed  a  dram.  Cinnamon  as  .much, 
and  having  beaten  them  to  Pouder  ad  half  as 
much  Maitich  in  Pouder,  and  with  Gum  A- 
rabick  diflolvedin  Rofe  Water,  make  it  up 
into  T  roches,  of  which  they  may  take  one  of 
about  half  a  dram  weight  an  hour  or  two  be¬ 
fore  meals,  let  old  men  and  women  make 
much  ol  this  medicine,  and  they  will  either 
give  me  thanks,  or  manifeft  ingratitude. 


Hedg^Muftard. 

Veferiptien. 

His  greweth  up  ufually  but  with  one 
blackifti  .green  Stalk,  tongh,  eafie  to 
bend  but  not  break,  branched  into  diverfe 
parts,  and  fomtime^ with  diverf  Stalks  fet  full 
of  Branches,  whereon  grow  long,  rough,  or 
hard  rugged  Leavs,  very  much  torn  and  cut  on 
the  edges  into  many  parts,  fome  bigger,  an4 
fome  lefler,  of  a  dirty  green  colour  :  The  Flo¬ 
wers  are  final  and  yellow,  that  grow  at  the 
tops  of  the  Branches,  in  long  Spikes,  flowring 
by  degrees,  fo  that  continuing  long  in  Flower 
the  ftalks  will  have  final  round  Cods  at  the 
bottom,  growing  upright  and  clofe  to  the 
Stalk,  WhUe  the  top  Flowers  yet  ftiew  them- 
felvsi  in  which  arc  contained  fmal  yellow 
Seed, {harp  and  fl:rong,as  the  Herb  is  alfotThe 
Root  groweth  down  flendcr  and  woody,  yet 
abiding,  and  Ipringing  again  every  yeer. 

Place- 

This  groweth  frequently  in  this  Land  by  the 
Waies  and  Hedg  fides,  and  fomtimes  in  the  o- 
pen  Fields. 

Time- 

It  flowreth  moft  ufually  ibout  July- 
Venues  and  vfe- 

It  is  fingukr  good  in  all  the  Difeafes  of  the  Pnafi, 
Cheft  ana  Lungs,  hoarcenefs  cf  voice,  and  by 
the  ufe  of  the  l5ecodion  therof  for  a  little  ^oarceneji 
fpace,  thofe  have  been  recovered  who  had  ut-  ^ough, 
terly  loft  their  voice,  and  almoft  their  SpiritsP®*"^^^^ 
alfo*  The  JuyCe  threof  made  into  a  Syrup,  or  breath, 
licking  Medicine  with  Honey  or  Sugar  is  no  Jr^^ndice, 
lefs  effeftiflal  for  the  fame  purpofe,  and  for  all 
other  Coughs,  Weefines,  and  fhortnefs 
Breath.  The  fame  is  alio  profitable  for  thofe  ^^J^y 
that  have  the  Jaundice,  thePlurefie,  pains  in^^%^, 
the  Back  and  Loyns,  and  for  torments  in  the  ^boUicl(^, 
Belly  or  the  Chollick,  being  alfo  ufed  in  Cly- 
fters.  The  Seed  is  held  to  be  a  fpecial  Reme-  ^^^^tica, 
dy  againft  Poyfon  and  Venom :  It  is  fingular  ^out, . 
good  for  the  Sciatica,thc  Gout,  and  all  Joynt-  J 
aches.  Sores  and- Cankers  in  the  Mouth, 

Throat,  or  behind  the  E^rs  J  and  no  lefs  for  t^loers, 
the  hardnefs  and  Swelliftg  of  the  Tcfticles,  or  ('^^kyrs, 
of  Womens  Breafts.  L clicks, 

CMars  owns  this  Herb  alfo.  omens 

Breajts- 


The  Eitglijh  Thyjitian, 


8? 


Ttrm 
p-rovolfeSi 
Barr  erne  (i 
Womb, 
wind. 
Mother , 
Cough, 
Rhewms, 
Vertigo, 
Cramp, 
Cold  ach. 
Difficulty 
of  breath  3 
Briiifes, 
Hemor¬ 
rhoids, 
Scabby 
Heads. 


^ ^  ^ ^  ^ 'I*  ^ 

Nep,  or  Catmint. 

Defcriptien. 

THe  commbn  garden  "^cp  fliooteth 
forth  hard  four  fquare  Stalks  with  a 
hoarincfs  on  them,  a  yard  high  or 
more,  full  of  Branches,  bearing  at 
every  Joynt two  broad  Leavs,  fomwhat  like 
Balm  but  longer  pointed,  fofter,  whiter,  and 
more  hoary,  nicked  about  the  edges,  and  of 
a  ftrong  fweet  fcem.  The  Flowers  grow  in 
large  tufts  at  the  tof*s  of  the  Branches,  and  un¬ 
derneath  them  likewifc  on  the  Stalks  many  to¬ 
gether,  of  a  whitilh  Purple  colour.  The 
Roots  are  compofed  of  many  long  firings  or 
Tibres,  faftning  themfelves  ftrongly  in  the 
ground,  and  abide  with  green  Leavs  thereon 
Si  the  Winter. 

Tlace. 

It  is  only  norfed  up  in  bur  Gardens* 

Time. 

And  it  flowreth  in  July  or  thereabouts. 
Vertues  -and  Ufe 

^  Nep  is  generally  ufed  for  Women  to  procure 
their  Courfes,  being  taken  inwardly  or  out¬ 
wardly,  either  alone  or  with  other  convenient 
Herbs  in  a  decodlionto  bath  them,  or  fit  over 


Vertues  and  Vfe. 

The  Roots  or  Leavs  boyled  or  the  Joyce  of 
either  of  them,  or  both,  made  into  an  Eledlu- 
ary  with  Honey  or  Sugar,  is  a  fafe  and  Cure 
Medicine  to  open  the  Pipes  and  paflages  of  the 
Lungs,  which  is  the  cauf  of  wheefing  andx,;/^;^^ 
fhortnefs  of  breath,  and  helpeth  to  expedto-^j[,^g~^^^' 
rate  toUgh  Flegm,  as  alfo  to  raife  the  impoftu-  rhortneli^ 
mated  Pleurefie,and  fpend  it  by  fpittihg  •,  "^hit^j^jjYeath, 
fame  helpeth  the  fwelling  of  the  Almonds  of 
the  Throat ,  the  Mouth  and  Throat  being  jiimonds 
gargled  therewith ;  The  juyee  is  alfo  oftheEars 

to  fettle  the  Pallate  of  the  Mouth  in  its  place, 
and  to  heal  and  temph'  the  Inflamations  and  j'fjygat 
forenefs  of  the  Mouth  and  Throat.  The  De- 
coftion  of  the  Leavs  in  Wine  being  drunk 
is  fingular  good  to  provoke  Womens  tlourfes,  'j'erms  * 
and  fettle  the  fuffocation  or  llrangling  of  pygi/ghes 
Mother,  ahtl  all  other  Difeales  thereol^  as  al-  ^ 

fo  applied  outwardly  V?ith  a  little  Mirrh.  The  Din^yy  ^ 
fame  alfo,  or  the  Seed  provoketh  Urine, 


as  Catarrh’s ,  Rhewms  ,  and  for  fwimming 
and  giddinefs  thereof,  and  is  of  efpecial  u/e 
for  the  windinefs  of  the  Stomach  and  Belly. 
It.  is  eft'edual  for  any  Cramps  or  cold  aches  to 
diflblve  the  cold  and  wind  that  afflidleth  the 
place,  andis  ufed  for  fi^olds,  Coughs,  and 
fliortnefs  of  breath .  The  Juyee  thereof  drunk 
in  Wine  is  profitable  for  thofe  that  are  bruifed 
by  any  accident.  The  green  Herb  bruifed  ahd 
applied  to  the  Fundament,  and  lying  there 
two  or  three  hours,  eafeth  the  pains  of  the 
Piles.  The  Juyee  alfo  being  made  up  into  an 
Oyntment,  is  effeftual  for  the  fame  furpofe  : 
The  head  walhed  with  a  Decodtion  thereof, it 
taketh  aw^iy  Scabs  j  and  may  be  effectual  for 
other  parts  of  the  Body  alfo. 

It  is  an  Herb  of  Venus. 

Nettles. 


expelleth  the  Gravel  ai^  Stone  in  the  Reins 
or  Bladder  often  proved  to  be  effe^ual  in  ma-  Spleen 
ny  that  have  taken  it.  The  fame  killeth 
W’orms  in  Children-  eafeth  pains  in  the  fides, 
and  diflblveth  the  windinefs  in  the  Spleen,  as 
alfo  in  the  Body,although  others  think  it  only  ^^tdDo^s ' 
powerful  to  provoke  Venery.  The  Juyee  ^ 

the  Leavs  taken  two  or  three  dales  together,  ^ 

fiaicth  bleeding  at  the  Mouth  :  The  Seed  be-  ^ 

ing  drunk  is  a  Remedy  againft  the  flinging  of 
V enemous  treatures,the  biting  of  Mad  Dogs  ’ 

the  hot  fumes  therof,  and  by  the  frequent  ufe  Thtpoyfonful  qualities  of  Hemlock,  Hen-j  e 
thereof  it  taketh  away  barrennefs,  and  the  _  bane,  Nightfliade,  Mandrake,'  or  other  fuch  r' 
wind  and  pains  of  the  Mother.  It  is  alfo  ufed  r^zr...  ‘ 

in  pains  of  the  Head  coming  of  any  cold  cauf, 

ly  to  rub  the  Forehead  and  Temples  to  the 
Lethargy,  and  the  places  bitten  or  flung  vvith 
Beafls,  with  a  little  Salt.  Thcdiflillcd  Water  *  ‘ 

cf  the  Herb  is  alfo  effeftual  (although  not  fo  -cifl-u/Lc 
powerful)  for  the  Difeafes  aforefaid,  as  for 
outward  Wounds  and  Sores  to  wafh  them,  and 
to  clenf  the  Skin  from  Morphew,  Lepry,  and  ^  ^ 

other  difcolourings  thereof:  The  Seed  orj^.,^j 
Leaves  bruifed  and  put  into  the  Noflrils,  ftai- 
eth  the  bleeding  of  them,  and  taketh  away  the  ^ 

Flefli  growing  in  them  called  Polipus.  The 
Juyee  of  the  Leavs,or  the  Decodtion  of  them,  * 

or  of  the  Roots,  ?s  fingular  good  to  waih  ei  -  Sciatica.  ' 
thcr  old  rotten  and  flinking  lores,  or  Fiftulaes  7 QY/its.  ^ 
and  Gangrenes,  and  fitch  as  are  fretting,  e^-'^  ^ 
ting,  or  corroding  Scabs,  Mainginefs  and  Itch 
in  any  part  of  the  Body,  as  alfo  green  Wotmds 
by  wajhing  them  therwith,  or  applying  the 
green  Herb  bruifed  thereunto,  yea  although 
the  Flelli  were  feperated  from  the  Bonos  ;  The 
fame  applied  to  our  wearied  Members  refre- 
flieth  them,  or  to  places  that  have  been  out  of 
Joynt  being  firfl  fet  again, flrengthneth,drieth 
Hefe  are  fo  well  known  that  they  need  no  |  and  comfot^eth  them,  as  alfo  thole  places  trou¬ 
bled  with  Aches  and  Gouts,  and  the  Defluxi¬ 
on  of  Humors  upon  the  Jbynts  or  Sinews,  it 
eafeth  the  pains,  and  drieth  or  difl'olvcth  the 
1  c  '  Deflwxionsl’ 


T 


Deferiptionat  all,  they  may  be  found 
by  the  feeling  in  the  darkeft  night. 


90 


The  Eu^hjh  ^hyjltiun* 


Defliixions.  An  Oyntment  made  of  the  Juyee , 

Oyl,  and  a  little  Wax,  is  fingular  good 
cold  and  benummed  hlembers.  An  handful 
of  the  Lcavs  of  green  Nettles,  and  another  of 

Wall  wort,  or  Danewort,,  bruifed  and  applied 

(imply  of  ihemfslves  to  the  Gout,  Sciatica,  or 
Joyntaches  in  any  part  hath  been  found  to  be 
an  admirable  help  thereunto-  ^  ^ 

This  alfo  is  an  Herb  Mars  claims  Domini¬ 
on  over,  youknow  ^lavs  is  hot  and  dry,  and 
you  bnow  as  well  that  Winter  is  cold  and 
nioift  ;  then  you  may  know  as  well  the  rcafon 
why  Nettle  tops  eaten  in  Spring  confume  the 

Flegmatickfupcrfluities  iutheBody  of  man, 

that  the  coldncfs  and  moiilurc  of  Winter, hath 
left  behind. 

Nightfhade. 

Common  Nighijhade  hath  an  upright, 
round,  green,  hollow  (talkjabout  a  root 
or  half  a  yard  high,  bufhing  forth  into  many 
Branches,  whereon  grow  many  pcen  /-eavs, 
fomwhat  broad  and  pointed  at  the  ends,  foft 
and  full  of  Juyee,  fomwhat  like  unto  Bazil, 
but  larger,  and  alittle  unevenly  dented  about 
the  edges  at  the  tops  of  the  Stalks  and  Bran¬ 
ches,  come  forth  three  or  four  or  more  white 

Blowers  made  of  five  fmal  pointed  Leavs  a- 
piece,  Handing  on  a  Stalk  together,  one  above 
another  with  yellow  pointels  in  the  middle, 
enmpofed  of  four  or  five  yellow  threds  fet  togc- 
.  ther  which  afterwards  turn  into  fo  many  pen¬ 
dulous  green  Berries  of  the  bignels  of  fmal 
Peafe,  full  of  green  Juyee,  and  fmal  whitim 
round  flat  Seed  lying  within  it.  The  Root  is 
white  and  a  little  woody  when  it  'hath  given 
Blower  and  Bruit  with  many  fmal  Bibres  at 
itj  The  whol  Plant  is  of  a  waterifti  infipide 
taft,  but  the  Juyee  within  the  Berries  is  fom¬ 
what  vifcuous,  and  of  a  cooling  and  binding 
quality. 

Place. 

It  groweth  wild  with  us,  under  old  W^ls, 
and  in  Rubbilh,  the  common  paths,and  fidcs 
of  Hedges  and  Bields,  as  alfo  in  our  Gardens 
here  in  Sngland  without  any  planting. 

Time. 

It  dicth  down  every  yeer,  and  arifeth  again 
of  its  own  fowing,  but  fpringeth  not  until  thi 
,  latter  end  of  prit  at  the  fconeft. 

Vertues  and  Vfe. 

This  Common  Nighijhade  is  wholly  ufed  to 
Jnfiamati-  cool  all  hot  Inflamations  either  inwardly  or 
tnSj  outwardly,  being  no  way  dangerous  to  any 

that  (Hall  ufe  it,  as  moft  of  the  reft  of  the 
Nightftiadesare;'  yet  it  muftbeufed  mode¬ 
rately  1  The  diftifled  water  only  of  the  whol 
Herb  is  fitteft  and  fafeft  to  be  taken  inwardly. 


The  Juyee  alfo  clarifled  and  taken  being 
mingled  with  a  little  Vinegar,  is  good  to  n 
wa(h  the  Mouth  and  Throat  that  is  inflamed  : 

But  outwardly  the  Juyee  of  the  Herb  or  ^ 
ries  with  Oyl  ofRofes,  and  a  little  Vinegar  J 
and  Cerufs  labored  together  in  a  leaden  Mor-  * 

ter,is  very  good  to  anoint  all  hot  Inflamati- 
onsintheByesj  It  doth  alio  much  8°°^^  * 

the  Shingles,  Ringworms,  and  in  all  running  „ 
fretting,  and  corroding  Ulcers,  and  in  moift 
Fiftulaes,  if  the  Juyee  be  made  up  with  feme  q  * 
Hens  dung  and  applied  thereto  :  A  Peflary  * 
flipp’d  in  the  Juyee,  and  put  up  into  the  Ma¬ 
trix  ftayeth  the  immoderate  Blux  of  Womens 
Courfes :  A  Cloth  wet  therein  and  applied  to 
the  Tefticlcs  or  Cods,  upon  any  Swelling 
therein  giveth  much  eaf,  as  alfo  to  the  Gout 
that  cometh  of  hot  and  (harp  Humors.  The 
Juyee  dropped  into  the  Ears,eafeth  pains  ther- 
in  that  arife  o(  heat  or  Inflamation.  And  Pli  - 
ny  laith,  it  is  good  for  hot  Swellings  under  the 
Throat. 

Have  a  care  you  miftake  not  the  deadly 
’^ifhtjhade  for  this  j  if  you  know  it  not,  you 
may  let  them  both  alone  and  take  no  haEm^ 
having  other  Medicines  fuificient  in  the 
Book. 


The  Oak. 

THis  is  fo  well  known  (the  Timber 
thereof  being  the  Glory  and  Safe¬ 
ty  of  this  Nation  by  Sea)  that  it 
needeth  no  Defeription. 

Venues  and  Ufe. 

The  Leavs  and  Bark  of  the  Oak,  and  the  . 
Acorn  Cups,  do  bind  and  dry 
The  inner  Bark  of  the  Tree,and  the  thqi  Sfan  J  & 
that  covereth  the  Acorn,  are  moft  ufed  to  (lay  » 

1  the  (pitting  of  Blood,  and  the  Bloody  Blux  : 

1  The  Decoaion  of  that  Bark  and  the  Pouder  ?  •  _ 
of  the  Cups,  today  Vomitings,  fpkting 
blood,  bleeding  at  Mouth,  or  other  Blux  of 
Blood  in  man  or  woman.  Tasks  alfo,  and  the 
involuntary  Blux  of  Natural  Seed.  TheA-pj  --J^' 
corns  in  Pouder  taken  in  Wine,  pravoketh  U- 
rine,  and  refifteth  the  Poyfon  of  Venemous 

Creatures.  The  Decoftion  of  ^  Cantha- 

the  Bark  made  in  Milk  and  taken  refifteth  the 

force  of  Poyfonous  Herbs  and  Medicines,  as 

alfo  the  Virulency  of  Cantharides,  vvhen  one  ,  ^lad' 

by  eati^  them,  hath  his  Bladder  exulcerated, 

and  piflech  Blood.  ....  .  ^  ,  Mather, 

Hippacrates  faith,  he  ufed  the  fumes  of  Oak 

Leavs  to  Womm  that  were  troubled  with  the 
ftranoling  of  the  Mother;  and  applied 

them'"  being  bruifed  to  cure  green  Wounds- 
The  Diftilfed  water  of  the  Oaken  Buds 

they  break  out  into  Leavs,  is  good  to  be  ufed 

ekher 


Tl?e  EngUJ})  Thyjitian, 


:[  injlam/i- 
I  tion, 

'■  FluXi 
;i  Te(iilen~ 

i:  ceSi 

!1  Bpidemi- 
;  cd  Difea.- 
l!  fesy 
Livery 
Stone, 
Terms 
(tops, 
^cabs. 


eithei-  inward,  or  outwardly,  to  afTwagc  Infla- 
mations  and  flop  all  manner  of  Fluxes  in  man 
■  o'r  woman:  The  fame  is  fmgular  good  in  P^- 
ftilential  and  hot  burning  Feavers,  for  it  re- 
iifteth  the  force  of  the  infeftion,  and  allay  eth 
the  heat  j  it  coolcth  the  heat  of  the  Liver, 
breaketh  the  Stone  in  the  Kidneys, and  ftaieth 
womens  Courfes :  The  Decoftiou  of  the 
Leavs  worketh  the  fame  efFe(fts.  The  water 
that  is  found  in  the  hollow  places  of  old  Oaks, 
isvery  efteftualagainft  any  foul  or  fpreading 
Scab. 

The  Diftilled  Water  (or  Decodion  which 
is  better)  of  the  Leavs  is  one  of  the  beft  Re¬ 
medies  that  1  know  for  the  Whites  in  Wo¬ 
men. 

Jupiter  owns  the  Tree. 

^3?  *3^  *1?  ?  *1?  ^  *1?  ‘I’ ^  ^  ^  ^  ^ 


til  the  next  yeer,  it  fpringeth  from  the  fame 
Root  again. 

Vermes  and  ufe. 

Half  a  Dram,  or  a  Dram  at  moft  In  Pouder 
of  the  Roots  hereof  taken  in  Wine  and  Vine¬ 
gar,  of  each  equal  parts,  and  the  party  laid 
prcfently  to  fweat  thereupon,  is  held  to  be  a 
Soveraign  Remedy  for  thofe  that  are  infe£led 
with  the  Plague,  and  have  a  Sore  upon  them, 
by  expelling  the  poyfon  and  infcftion,and  de¬ 
fending  the  Heart  and ‘Spirits  ..from  danger. 
It  is  a  Angular  good  Wound  Herb,  arid  is 
therupon  ufed  w^  other  the  like  effe^s  in  ma¬ 
king  Compound  Balms  for  the  curing  of 
Wounds,  be  they  frelh  and  green,  or  old  and 
Malignant,  and  efpecially  if  the  Sinews  be 
hurt. 


Tefiilencei 

Foyfon, 

Epidemi- 

cdDtfea^ 

fes, 

Wounds, 

Sinews 

cut.. 


Stitch, 

wind, 

Jtcb, 


Oats. 

Hcfe  arc  alfo  fo  well  known  that  they  need 
no  Defcription. 

Vertues  and  Vfe. 

Oats  fryed  with  Bay-Salt,  and  applied  to  the 
Ades,  taKes  aWay  the  pains  of  Stitches  and 
Wind  in  the  fides  or  Belly  :  A  Pultismadeof 
bats,  and  fome  Oyl  of  Bays  put 
vUtL’iJc  thereto,  hclpcth  the  Itch,  ahd  the  Lcprofie,  as 
allo  the  Fiftulaes  of  the  Fundament ,  and  dif- 
Freckles.*  ^°Ivcth  hard  impofthumes.  The  Meal  of 
^  ^  *  Oats  boyled  with  Vinegar  and  applied, taketh 

away  Freckles  and  Spots  in  the  Face,  or  other 
pans  of  the  Body. 

Onc-blade: 

Defcription.  , 

THis  final  Plant  never  beai'eth  more  than 
one  Leaf,  but  only  when  it  rifeth  up 
.  with  his  Stalk,  which  thereon  bearcth 
another,  and  feldom  more,'  which  are  of  a 
blcwilh  green  colour, pointed,  with  many  Ribs 
or  Veins  therein,  like  Plantane  :  At  the  top 
of  the  Stalk,  grow  many  final  white  Flowers, 
Star-fafhion,  finelling  fomwhat  fweet  j  affer 
which  come  final  rcddifti  Berries  when  they  are 
ripe.  TheRootisfmallof  the  bignefs  of  a 
Ruihjlying  and  creeping  under  the  upper  cruft 
tff  the  Earth,  ftiooting  forth  in  diverfe  pla¬ 
ces. 

Tlace. 

It  graweth  in  moift,  fhadowy,  and  grally 
places  of  Woods,  in  many  places  of  this 
Land. 

Time. 

It  Flowreth  about  May,  and  the  Berries  be 
ripe  in  June,  and  then  quickly  periiheth  un- 


Onions. 

'Hefc  arc  fix  well  known  that  I  need  not 
fpend  time  about  writing  a  Defcription 
of  them. 

Venues  and  Vices. 

Onions  are  Flatulent  or  Windy,  yet  they  do 
fomwhat  provoke  appetite,  cncreafthirft,  caf 
the  Belly  and  Bowels  j  provoke  Womens 
Courfes,.  help  the  biting  of  a  mad  Dog,  and  MadDogs, 
of  other  Venemous  Creatures,  to  be  ufed  with  werms. 
Honey  and  Rue,  and  cncrcafeth  Sperm,  cfpe-  Cough, 
cially  the  Seed  of  them  :  They  mfo  kill  the  Lethargy^ 
Worms  in  Children  if  they  drink  the  Water  Epidemic 
falling  wherein  they  have  been  fteeped  all  cd  pifecL~ 
night.  Btiing  roafted  u^der  the  Embers  and  fes. 
eaten  with  Honey,  or  Sugar  and  Oyl  they 
much  conduce  to  help  an  inveterate  Coughs 
and  expC(ftorate  the  tough  Flegm.  The  juyee 
being  muffed  up  into  the  Noftrils,putgcth  the 
Head  and  helpeth  the  Lethargy  (yet  the  often 
eating  of  them  is  faid  to  procure  pains  in  the 
Head)  It  hath  been  held  with  diverf  Coimtry 
people  a  good  prefervative  againft  Infcdiou  to 
eat  Onions  falling  \yith  Bread  and  Salt":  as 
alfo  to  make  a  great  Onion  hollow,  filling  the 
placcwithgood  Triacle,  and  after  to  roaft  ic 
well  under  the  Embers,  which  after  taking  a- 
way  of  the  outermoft  skin  thereof,  being  bea¬ 
ten  together,  is  a  Soveraign  Salve  for  cither 
Plague-Sore,  or  any  other  putrid  Ulcer.  The 
Juyee  of  Onions  is  good  for  either  fcalding,or 
burning  by  fire,water,  or  G'unponder,and  ufed 
with  Vinegar,  taketh  away  all  Blemiflics, 

Spots,  and  Marks  in  the  Skin,  and  dropped  in¬ 
to  tfafi  Ears,  eafeth  the  pains  and  noif  of  them. 

Applied  alfo  with  Figs  beaten  together,  hel- 
petn  to  ripen  arid  break  Impoftumes  and  other 
Sores. 

are  as  like  th,em  in  quality  as  a  Pome- 
water  is  like  an  Apple :  They  are  a  Remedy 
againft  a  Surfeit  or  Mulhroms,  being  baked’ 

C  c  2  dridcr 


I 


pi 


Sxcoriit- 

tion  of 

Bowels, 

Thufic\, 

Womb, 

Bloody 

Bliix, 

Wounds, 

Jnftama.- 

tion, 

Scalding, 

Burnings, 

^infie, 

RupturcS’ 


under  the  Embers  and  taken  j  and  being  boy- 
led  and  applied  warm  helpeth  the  Piles  J  In 
other  things  they  have  the  fame  property  as  the 
Onions,  although  not  fo  effedual. 

Mars  owns  them,  and  they  have  gotten  this 
quality,  to  draw  any  corruption  to  them,  for 
if  you  pill  one  and  lay  him  upon  a  Dunghil, 
you  fhall  find  him  rotten  in  half  a  day,  by 
drawing  putrifadion  to  it,  then  being  bruifed 
and  applied  to 'a  Plague-Sore  ’tis  very  proba¬ 
ble  ’twill  do  the  like. 


what  he  will")  for  a  Quinfie,  and  you  lhall  find 
the  Medicine  more  plcafant,  and  the  Cur« 
morefpeedy,  than  if  you  took  a  Dogs-turd 
which  is  the  Learned  GoUedges  vulgar 
Cure. 


The  Moon  owns  the  Herb,  and  he  that 
knqws  but  her  Exaltation,  knows  what  I  fay  is 
true. 


Parfley. 


Orpine. 

Vefeription- 

Common  Orpm  irifeth  up  with  diverfe 
round  brittle  Stalks,  thick  fet  with  fat 
and  flelby  Leavs  without  any  order,  and  little 
or  nothing  dented  about  the  edges,  of  a  pale 
green  colour  j  The  Flowers  are  white  or 
whitifh  growing  in  tufts,  after  which  comfe 
fmall  chaffy  Husks,  with  Seed  like  duff  in 
them.  The  Roots  are  diverfe  thick,  round 
white  tuberous  clogs  j  and  the  Plant  groweth 
not  fo  big  in  fome  places  as  in  others  where  it 
is  found. 

VUce. 

It  is  frequent  almoft  in  every  Country  of 
this  Land,  and  is  cherifhed  in  Gardens  with 
us,  where  it  groweth  greater  than  that  which 
is  wild,  and  grdweth  in  the  fhadowy  fides  of 
Tields  and  Woods. 

Time.  , 

It  Flowreth  about  July  and  the  Seed  is  ripe 
ln.Augujl. 

Vertues  andvfe. 

Orpine  is  feldom  ufed  in  inward  Medicines 
with  us,  although  Tragus  faith  from  experi¬ 
ence  in  Germany  that  the  diftilled  w'ater  there¬ 
of  is  profitable  for  gnawings  or  excoriations 
in  the  Stomach  or  !^wels,  and  for  Ulcers  in 
the  LungSjLiver,  or  other  inward  parts,  as  al- 
fo  in  the  Matrix,  and  helpeth  all  thofe  Difea- 
fes,  being  drunk  for  certain  daics  together  : 
And  that  it  ftaycth  the  fharpnefs  of  Humors 
in  the  Bloody  Flux,  and  other  Fluxes  in  the 
Body,  @r  in  Wounds :  The  Root , thereof  alfo 
performeth  the  fame  effeft.  It  is  ufed  out¬ 
wardly  to  cool  any  heat  or  Inflamation  upon 
any  Hurt  or  Wound,  and  eafeth  the  pains  of 
them  :  as  alfo  to  heal  Scaldings  or  Burnings ; 
The  juyee  ^hereof  beaten  with  feme  green 
Sallet  Oyljand  anointed  :  The  Leaf  alfo  brui¬ 
fed  and  laid  to  any  greenWound  in  the  Hands 
or  Legs,  doth  heal  them  quickly  3  and  being 
bound  to  the  Throat,  much  helpeth  the  Quin- 
fic.  It  helpeth  alfo  Ruptures  and  Burffinefs. 

Ifyoupleafto  make  the  Joyce  into  a  Syrup 
withHoncy  or  Sugar,  you  may  iafely  take  a 
fpoontul  or  two  at  a  time  (let  my  Author  fay 


THis  is  fo  well  known  to  be  an  In¬ 
habitant  in  every  Garden,  that  k 
is  needlefs  to  write  any  Defeription 
of  it.  The  vertues  of  it  being  ma¬ 
ny  are  as  followeth. 

Venues  andufei 

It  is  very  comfortable  to  the  Stomach,  and  Stomaebi 
helpeth  to  provoke  Urine  and  Womens  Cour-  -Difury, 
fes,  and  to  break  wind  both  in  the  Stomach  Terms 
and  Bowels,  and  doth  a  little  c^en  the  ^ody,  ^Yovolies^ 
but  the  Root  much  more,  and  openeth  Ob-  Liver, 
firudions  both  of  the  Liver  and  Spleen,  and  spleen, 
is  therfore  accounted  one  of  the  five  opening  Lallinf^ 
Roots  5  Galen  commendeth  it  againft  the  feline f, 
Falling-ficknefs,  and  to  provoke  Urine  migh-  Stone, 
tily,  Specially  if  the  Roots  be  boyled  and  ea-  wind, 
ten  like  Parfnips.  The  Seed  is  effedual  to  VenemoUi 
provoke  Urine  and  Womens  COurfes,  to  ex-  Bcajis, 
pel  wind,  to  break  the  Stone,  andeafthepaios  Cough, 
and  torments  thereof,  or  of  any  other  part  in  Sucl^ing 
the  Body  occafioned  by  Wind.  It  is  alfo  effe-  children, 
dual  againft  the  Venom  of  any  poyionfuil  Syes, 
Creature,  and  the  danger  that  cometh  to  them  womens 
that  haVe  taken  Litharge,  and  is  good  againft 
the  Cough.  The  diftilled  water  of  Parfley  is  a  Curdled 
familiar  Medicine  with  Nurfes  to  give_  their  Milk, 
Children  when  they  are  troubled  with  wind  in  Black 
the  Stomach  or  Bellyjwhich  they  call  the  frets,  Plug  jnxrks 
and  is  alio  ruuch  available  to  them  that  are  of  Jaundice, 
greater  yeers.  The  Leavs  of  Parfley  laid  to  Balling- 
the  Eyes  that  are  inflamed  with  heat  or  fwoln,  fttknef, 
doth  much  help  them,  if  it  be  ufed  with  Bread  Droppe, 
or  Meal  5  and  being  fr^^^d  with  Butter  and  ap¬ 
plied  to  Womens  Breafts  that  are  hard  through 
the  curdling  of  their  Milk,  it  abateth  the 
hardnefs  quickly,  and  alfo  it  taketh  away  black 
and  blue  marks  coming  of  Bruifes  or  Falls. 

The  Juyee  thereof  dropped  into  the  Ears  with 
a  little  Wine  eafeth  the  pains.  Tragus  fetteth 
down  an  excellent  Medicine  to  help  the  Jaun¬ 
dice  and  Ealling-fjcknefs,  the  Dropfie,  and 
Stone  in  the  Kidneys,  in  this  manner :  Take 
of  the  Seeds  of  Par  (Icy, Fennel,  Annis^.  and  Ca¬ 
raways  of  each  an  ounce  3  of  the  Roots  of 
Parfley,  Burnet,  S^?a7/M^e,'and  Carawaics,  of 
each  one  ounce  and  an  half,  let  the  Seeds  be 
bruifed,  and  the  Roots  waflicd  and  cut  final: 

Let  them  lie  all  night  in  iteep  in  a  pottle  of 

white 


The  Thyjltian 


i8j? 


white  Wine,  andin  the  morning  be  boylcd 
in  a  clofe  earthen  VelTel  until  a  third  part  or 
more  be  wailed  jwhich  being  ftrained  and  clea¬ 
red  :  take  four  ounces  thereof  morning  and  e- 
vening  firll  and  laft,  abilaining  from  drink 
ons  of  the  it  for  three  hours  :  This  openeth  Ob- 

Liver  &  ftrudions  of  the  Liver  and  Spleen, and  cxpel- 
^^kcn.  Jeth  rhe  Droplie  andj aundice  by  Urine. 

^  4''  4'’  ^  •  ‘I’  *1’  “t*  4'’  ^  *1'  ^ 


Parfnip. 


provok^Sj 

Vifta-yy 

Clenfcy 

Open, 

Venemoiii 

Beafis, 

CboUic\, 

Vifury. 


THe  Garden  kind  hereof  is  fo  well  known 
(the  Root  being  commonly  eaten)  that  I 
fhal  not  trouble  you  w^*^  anyDefeription  of  it. 
But  the  wild  kind  being  of  more  Phyheal  ufe, 
I  ihall  in  this  place  deferibe  unto  you. 
T)ifcnption- 

The-wild  P<n'//zip  differeth  little  from  the 
Garden  kind,  but  groweth  not  fo  fair  and 
large,  nor  hath  fo  many  Leavs  5  and  the  Root 
is  uiorter,  more  woody  and  not  fo  fit  to  be  ea¬ 
ten,  and  therefore  the  more  Medicihable. 
P^ace. 

The  name  of  the  firft  iheweth  the  place  of 
its  growth,  In  Gardens. 

The  other  groweth  wild  in  diverf  places,  as 
in  the  Marihes  by  Rochefter  and  elfwhere,  and 
flowrethin/«/yj  the  Seed  being  ripe  about 
the  beginning  of  Angtifi,  the  fecond  ycer  after 
the  fowing  :  for  if  they  do  flower  the  firft  ycer 
the  Coumry  people  call  them  Madneps. 
Venues  and  u  fe. 

•  The  Garden  nourilheth  much,  and 

is  d  and  wholfom  Nourilhment,  but  a 
1:1*  c  windy,  whereby  it  is  thought  to  procure 
^-iilyluft:  but  it  fatneth  the  Body  much  if 
much  ufed.  It  is  conducible  to  the  Stornaeh 
and  Reinsjand  provoketh  Urine.  But  the  wild 
Farfnep  hath  a  cutting,  attenuating,  clenfing 
and  opening  quality  therein  :  It  refifteth  and 
helpeth  the  bitings  of  Serpents,  eafeth  pains 
and  Stitches  in  the  fides,  and  diflblveth  wind 
both  in  the  Stomach  and  Bowels,  which  is  the 
Chollick,  and  provoketh  Urine.  The  Root 
is  often  ufed,  but  the  Seed  much  more. 

The  wild  being  better  than  the  tameftiews 
Dame  'Hj.tme  is  the  beft  Phyfitian. 

Cow-Parfnep. 

.  Defcrlption. 

THis  groweth  with  three  or  four  large 
fpread,  winged,  rough,  Leavs,  lyin*  of¬ 
ten  on  the  Ground,  or  elfc  raifed  a  little 
from  it,  with  long,  roundjhairy  footftalks  un¬ 
der  them,  parted  ufually  into  five  devifions, 
the  two  couples  ftanjiing  each  againft  other. 


afid  one  at  the  end,and  each  Leaf  being  almoft 
round,  yet  fomwhat  deeply  cut  in  on  the  edges 
in  fome  Leavs,  and  not  fo  deep  in  others,  of  a 
whitifh  green  colour,  fmclling  fomwhat 
llrongly :  among  which  arifeth  up  a  round 
crefted  hairy  Stalk  two  or  three  foot  high  with 
a  few  Joynts  and  Leavs  thcrcon,and  branched 
at  the  top,  where  ftand  large  Umbels  of  white, 
and  fomtimes  reddilh  Flowers, and  after  them, 
flat,  whitiih,  thin  winged  Seed,  two,  alwaies 
joyned  together.  The  Root  is  long  and  white 
with  t\vo  or  three  long  firings  growing  down 
into  the  ground,  fmaling  likewifc  ftrongly, 
andunpleafant.  ^ 

Place. 

It  groweth  in  mpift  Meadows,  and  the  bor¬ 
ders  and  corners  of  Fields,  and  neer  Ditches, 
generally  through  this  Land. 

Time. 

It  Flowrcth  in  July,  and  Sccdoth  in 
guf. 

Venues  and  Vfe. 

The  Seed  hereof  as  Galen  faith  is  of  a  (harp 
and  cutting  quality,  and  is  therefore  a  fit  Me¬ 
dicine  for  the  Cough  and  Ihortnefs  of  Breath,  Cou^, 
the  Falling-ficknefs  and  the  Jaundice.  Bifficuliy. 

Root  is  available  to  all  the  purpofes  aforefaid,  gf  breath, 
and  is  alfo  of  great  ufe  to  take  away  the  h*d  paUing- 
skin  that  groweth  on  a  Fiftulajif  it  be  but  fclpief, 
ped  upon  it.  The  Seed  hereof  being  drunk 
clenfeth  the  belly  from  tough  Flegiftatick  mat-  piftnld, 
ter  therein :  eafeth  them  that  are  Liver-grown,  pigg^, 
and  Womens  paftions  of  the  Mother,  as  wcll^j^^^^ 
being  drunk  as  the  fmoke  thereof  received  un-  Mother^ 
derncath,  and  likewife  raifeth  fuch  as  are  fallen  igthargyy 
into  a  deep  fleep,  or  have  the  Lethargy,  by  Prenxy, 
burning  it  under  their  Nofe:  The  Seed  ^^^Headaeh^ 
Rootboyled  in  Oyl,  and  the  Head  rubbed 
therewith,  helpeth  not  only  thofe  that  are  fil"SH«g/ej. 
len  into  a  Frenzy,  but  alfo  the  Lethargy  or 
Drowfieevilj  and  thofe  that  have  been  long 
troubled  with  the  Headach,  if  it  be  likewife  u- 
fed  with  Rue  :  It  helpeth  alfo  the  running 
Scab  and  the  Shingles :  The  juyee  of  the 
Flowers  dropped  into  the  Ears  that  run  and 
are  ful  of  matter,  it  clenfeth  and  healeth 
them. 

The  Peach-tree. 

T:)efcYiption> 

THe  T? each-tree  groweth  not  fo  great  as  the 
Apricock-tree ,  yet  fpreadeth  Branches 
reafonablewell,  from  whence  fpring  fmaller 
reddifh  twigs,  whereon  are  fetlong  and  nar¬ 
row  green  Leavs  dented  about  the  edges.  The 
Blofloms  are  greater  than  the  Plum,  and  of  z 
light  Purple  colour.  The  Fruit  round,  and 
fomtimes  as  big  as  a  reafonablc  Pippin,  others 
arc  fmaller,  as  alfo  differing  in  colours  and 
D  d 


po 


The  Englip)  Thyptian. 


rafts,  as  nifler,  red,  or  yellow,  waterilh  or 
ftrm,  with  a  frieze  or  Cotton  all  over,  with  a 
cleft  therein  like  an  Apriceck,  and  a  rugged 
^  furrowed  great  Stone  within  it,  and  a  bitter 
Kernel  within  the  Stone  :  'It  fooner  waxtth 
old,  and  dccaycth,  than  the  Apvicock,  by 
much. 

Tlarc- 

They  are  nurfed  up  in  Gardens  and  Or¬ 
chards  through  this  Land- 
Time. 

They  Flower  in  the  Spring,  and  Fruftifie 
an  Autitmn^ 

Vert  lies  and  life. 

The  Leavs  of  Peaches  bruifed  and  laid  on 
iVorms,  the  Belly  killeth  Worms  j  and  fo  they  do  alfo 

OpcHi  being  boyled  in  Ale  and  drunk,  and  open  the 

Humor  Si  Belly  likewife  ;  and  being  dried  is  afafe  Mc- 
V/eundSi  dicine  to  difeufs  Humors.  The  Potider  of 
them  ftrewed  upon  frefli  bleeding  Wounds, 
ftayeth  their  bleeding  and  clofeth  them  up.^ 
The  Flowers  fteeped  all  night  in  a  little  Wine 
Handing  warm,  itrained  forth  in  the  morning 
and  drunk  falling,  doth  gently  open  the  Belly 
andmove  it  downwards :  A  Syrup  made  of 
them  as  the  Syrup  of  Rofes  is  made,  worketh 
'  more  forcibly  than  that  of  Rofes,  for  it  pro- 
ilibketh  Vomiting,  and  fpendeth  waterilh  and 
Hydropick  Humors  by  the  continuance  there¬ 
of.  The  Flowers  made  into  a  Conferve  wor- 
fceth  the  fame  effeft.  The  Liquor  that  drop- 
peth  from  the  Tree  bein^  wounded,  is  given 
VropJiej  in  the  Decodtion  of  Coltsfoot,  tothofethat 
Coughi  arc  troubled  w’ith  the  Cough  or  Ihortncfs  of 
/i&arwe/?  breath,  by  adding  thereto  fome  fweetWinc  i 
Sreathi  and  putting  fome  Saffron  alfo  therein,  it  is 
Vomitingi  good  for  thofe  that  are  hoarce  or  have  loft 
(pitting  their  voice ;  helpeth  all  defedls  of  the  Lungs, 
ef  Bloody  and  thofe  that  vomit  or  Ipit  blood.  Two 
Stone,  drams  thereof  given  in  the  3  uyee  of  Lemmons 

voindy  or  of  Radifli,  is  good  for  thofe  that  are  trou- 
ChoUicfiy  bled  with  the  Stone.  The  Kernels  of  the 
Stones  do  wonderfully  eafthe  pains  and  wrin¬ 
gings  of  the  Belly  through  wind  or  ftiarp  Hu¬ 
mors,  and  help  to  make  an  excellent  Medicine 
for  the  Stone  upon  all  occafions,  on  this  man¬ 
ner  f  T ake  fifty  Kernels  of  Peach  Stones,and 
one  hundred  of  the  Kernels  of  Cherry  Stones, 
a  handful  of  Elder  Flowers,  frefh  or  dried, _and 
three  pints  of  Mufeadine,  fet  them  in  a  clofed 
pot  into  a  bed  of  Horfe  dung  for  ten  daies, 
•  which  after  diftill  in  Glafs  with  a  gentle  fire, 

and  keep  it  for  yoift  ufe  J  you  may  drink  upon 
occafion  three  or  four  ounces  at  a  time.  The 
Milk  or  Cream  of  thefe  Kernels  being  drawn 
forthwith  fome  Vervain  Water,  and  applied 
to  the  Forehead  and  Temples,  doth  much  help 
Watching)  to  procure  reft  and  deep  to  fickperfons  wan¬ 
ting  it.  The  Oyl  drawn  from  the  Kernels, 
the  Temples  being  therewith  anointed  doth 


thcliVc  :  The  fail!  Oyl  put  into  Clyfters  ea- 
feth  tbe  pains  cf  the  wind  Cliollick,  and  s- 
nointed  on  the  lower  part  @f  the  Belly  doth, 
the  like,  and  dropped  into  the  Ears  eafeth 
painsofihem:  The  juyee  of  the  Leavs  doth 
the  like  :  being  .alfo  anointed  on  the  Forhead 
and  Temples,  it  hripeth  the  Megrim  and  all 
other  pains  in  the  Head  *  If  the  Keraels  be 
bruifed  and  boyled  in  Vinegar  until  they  be- 
ceme  thick,  and  applied  to  the  Head,  it -mer- 
veiloufly  procure  the  Hair  to  grew  again  up-  Baldmp.^ 
on  bald  places  or  where  it  is  too  thin. 

Lady-F^'W?^^  owns  this  Tree,  and  by  it  op-  ^ 
pofeth  the  ill  effeds  of  Mars,  and  indeed  ior 
Children  and  yong  people,  nothing  is  better 
to  purge  Choller,  and  the  Jaundice,  than  the 
Leavs  and  Flowers  of  this  Tree,  being  mad©^ 
into  a  Syrup  or  Conferve,  let  fuch  as  delight 
to  plcafe  their  lull  regard  the  Fruit,  but  fuch 
as  love  their  health  and  their  Childrens,  let 
them  regard  what  I  fay,  they  may  fafely  give 
two  fpoonfuls  of  the  Syrup  at  a  time,  ’:is  as 
gentle  as  Venm  her  felf. 

The  Pear-tree. 

THefe  are  fo  well  known  that  they  need  no 
Defciiption. 

Venues  and  Vfe. 

For  their  Phyfical  ufe  they  aiic  beft  difeer- 
ned  by  their  tails  :  All  the  fweet  or  lulhious 
forts  whether  manured  or  wild,  do  help  to 
move  the  Belly  downward  more  or  lefs:  Thofe 
that  are  harfh  and  fowr  do  on  the  eontra^ 
bind  the  Belly  as  much  j  and  the  Leavs  do  to 
alfo.  Thefe  that  are  moift  do  in  fome  fort 
cool,  but  harfti  or  wild  forts  much  more,  and 
are  very  good  in  repelling  Medicines ;  ss  if 
the  wild  forts  be  boyled  with  Muftiroms,  itMulhraMS 
maketh  them  the  lefs-  dangerous.  The  ftid 
Pears  boyled  with  a  little  Honey,  helpeth 
much  the  opprefted  Stomachjas  al  forts  of  tliem 
do,  fome  more,  foma  lefs  ;  but  the  harfticr  *  ^ 

lorts  do  moft  cool  and  bind,  ferving  well  to 
be  bound  to  green  wounds  to  cool  and  ftay  the  ^ 
Blood,  and  heal  up  the  wound  wiihout  fur-infamd' 
ther  trouble  or  Inflamation ;  as  Galen  faith  he  tions, 
hath  found  by  experience.  And  wild  Pears  do  Cool, 
fooner  clofe  up  the  Lips  of  green  Wounds  Bind, 
than  the  others.  n  ounds. 

Schola  Salerni  adviftth  to  drink  much  Wine 
after  Pears,  or  elf  (they  fay)  they  are  as  bad  as 
poyfon,  nay  and  they  curf  the  T ree  for  it  too,  , 

but  if  a  poor  man  find  his  Stomach  opprefied 
by  eating  Pears  ’tis  but  working  hard  and  it 
will  do  as  wel  as  drinkingWine.The  Tree  be¬ 
longs  to  Venm,  and  fo  doth  the  Apple-trcc. 


Pcllitory 


4 


*«• 


'-I'*  'Jj*  fJ?  ft’’  'iS?  4? 


Pellitory  of  the  Wall. 


Vefcrlption. 

Hisi’ifcth  up  with  many  brownifhj  red, 
I  tender  and  vv:ak,  clear, and  alinoft  tran- 
fparent  fta^Jes  about  two  foot  high,  upon 
which  grow  at  the  feveral  Joynts,  two  Leavs 
fomwhat  broad  and  long,  of  a  dark  green  co¬ 
lour,  which  aft^wards  turn  brownilh,  fmooth 
on  the  cdgcSjbuT  rough  and  hairy  as  the  S’ talks 
are  alforAt  thejoynts  with  the  Leavs  from  the 
middle  of  the  ftalks  upwards,wher  it  fpreadeth 
into  fome  branches, ftand  many  fmal  palejpur- 
pliih  Flowcrsjin  hairy  rough  Heads  or  Husksj 
after  which  come  fmau  black  and  rough  Seed, 
which  will  Hick  to  any  cloth  or  Garment  that 
fliall  touch  it.  The  Root  is  fomwhat  long 
with  many  fmal  Fibres  thereat,  of  adarkred- 
diflt  colour,  which  abideth  the  Winter,  al¬ 
though  the  Stalks  and  Leavs  pcrifli  and  fpting 
afrefh  every  yeer. 

Vlacc. 

It  groweth  wild  generally  through  this 
Land,  about  the  borders  of  Fields,  aud  by 
thefides  of  Walls,  and  among  Rubbifh  j  It 
will  endure  w^l  being  brought  into  Gardens, 
and  planted  on  the  lhady  fide,  where  it  will 
fpring  of  its  ©wfi  fowing. 


It  flowreth  in  and  the  Seed 

is  ripe  foon  after. 

Vettues  and.  Z)fe. 

The  driedHerb  Pc W/*ory  made  up  into  an 
Eleduary  with  Honey/  or  the  juyee  of  the 
Herb,  or  the  Decoftion  thereof  made  up  with 
Sugar  or  Honey,  is  a  fingular  Remedy  for  any 
rtU  M  A’--)  fhortnefs  of  breath,  and 

Cou  h  Throat.  Three  ounces  of 

IhlhnoR  juyee  thereof  taken  at  a  time,  doth  won- 
'L'  n.-oLu  derfully  help  flopping  of  the  Urine,  and  to  ex- 
^  /  j  pel  the  Stone  or  Gravel  in  the  Kidneys  or 
Gravel  therfore  ufually  put  a'mong  o- 

^  thcr  Herbs,  ufed  in  Cliflers  to  mitigate  pains 
in  the  Back, .  Sides,  or  Bcfwcls  proceeding  of 
wind,  floppiag  of  Urine,  the  Gravel  or  Stone 
as  aforefaid  :  II  the  bruifed  Herb  fprinkled 
with  fome  Muskadine  be  warmed  upon  a  Tilej 
or  in  a  Difti  upon  a  few  quick  coals  in  a  Cha^ 
fmg-difti,  and  applied  to  the  Belly,  it  wor- 
keth  the  fame  cfFed.  The  Decodion  of  the 
Molhe^i  Herb  being  drunk,  eafeth  pains  of  the  Mo- 
n  omens  thetjand  bringeth  down  Womens  Courfesj 
Cowtfesy  it  alfo  eafeth  thofe  griefs  that  arife  from  Ob'r 
9bftYu£li-  flrudions  of  the  Liver,  Spleen,  and  Reins : 
ons.  The  fame  Dccodion  with  a  little  Honey  ad- 
Sore  'ded  thereto  is  good  to  gargle  a  fore  Throat. 

Throat)  The  Juyee  held  a  while  in  the  Mouth,  eafeth 

Teeth)  pains  in  the  Teeth.  The  diflilled  water  of 
the  Herb  drunk  with  fome  Sugar  worketh  the 


fame  efFeds  j  and  clenfeth  the  Skin  from  freckles. 
Spots,  Freckles,  Purples,  Wheals,  Sunburn,  vi'beals, 
Morphew,  &c.  Smbnrn, 

The  Juyee  dropped  into  the  Ears  eafeth  the  MorpbcW) 
noife  in  them,  and  taketfa  away  the  pricking  pain  in  the 
and  fhooting  pains  therein :  The  fame  or  the  Ears, 
diflilled  Water,  affwageth  hot  and  fwelling  Impoftums 
Impoflumes,  Burnings  and  Scaldings  by  fire  Burnings 
or  Water,  as  alfo  all  other  hot  Tumors  and  &  Seal- 
Inflamations,  or  breakings  out  of  Heat,  be-  dings, 
ing  bathed  often  with  wet  Cloathes  dipped  inflamor 
therein.  The  faid  Juyee  made  into  a  Liniment  tions 
with  Cerufsand  Oyl  of  Rofes  and  anointed  Vlcers, 
therewith,  clenfeth  foul  rotten  Ulcers,  and  Scabs, 
ftayeth  fpreading  or  creeping  Ulcers,  and  the  Falling  of 
running  Scabs  or  Sores  in  Childrens  Heads :  the  Hair, 
and  helpeth  to  flay  falling  of  the  Hair  from  off  Pi/cx, 
the  Head.  The  faid  Oyntment,  or  the  Herb  Gout, 
applied  to  the  Fundament  openeth  the  Piles  fiflulaes, 
and  eafeth  their  pains ;  and  being  m  ixed  with  Green 
Goats  Tallow,  helpeth  the  Gout.  The  Juyee  Wounds, 
isvery  efteaualtoclenfFiflulacs,  and  to  heal  Bruijed, 
them  up  fafelyi  or  the  Herbit  felf  bruifed.  Tendon  g? 
and  applied  with  a  little  Salt.  It  is  likcwife.fo  Mufcle, 
effcftual  to  heal  any  green  Wound,  that  if  it 
be  bruifed  and  bound  thereto  for  three  daies, 
you  fliall  need  no  other  Medicine  to  heal  it 
further.  A  Pultis  made  hereof  with  Mallows, 
and  boyled  in  Wine,  with  Wheat  Bran,  and 
Bean  Flower,  and  fome  Oyl  put  thereto,  and 
applied  warm  to  any  bruifed  Sinew,  Tendon, 
or  Mufcle,  doth  in  a  very  fhort  time  reftore 
them  to  their  ftrength,  taking  away  the  pains 
oftheBruifes,  and  diflblvcth  the  congealed 
Blood  coming  of  tlows  or  Falls  from  high 
places. 

The  Jnyce  o( Pellitory  of  ivaH  clarified  and 
boyled  into  a  Syrup  with  Honey,  and  a  fpocn- 
ful  of  it  drunk  every  morning  by  fuch  as  are 
fubjeft  to  the  Dropfie,if  continuing  that  courf 
though  but  once  a  week,  if  ever  they  have  the 
Dropfie,  let  them  come  but  to  me,  and  I  will 
cure  them  gratis* 


Peny-royal. 

Defeription. 

'T^His  is  fo  well  known  unto  all  (I  mean  the 
common  kind)  that  it  needeth  no  De- 
fermtion. 

There  is  a  greater  kind  than  the  ordinary 
fort  found  wild  with  us,  which  fo  abideth  be¬ 
ing  brought  into  Gardens,  aud  difFcreth  not 
from  it  but  only  in  the  largenefs  of  the  Leava 
and  Stalks,  in  rifing  higher,  and  not  aeeping 
upon  the  ground  fo  much.  The  Flowers 
whsreof  are  Purplc,growing  in  Rundles  about 
the  Stalk  like  the  other. 

Place.  ^ 

The  firft  which  is  common  in  Gardens,  ^ 
D  d  x  groweth 


1^1 


Tl)e  En^lijh  ^byfttian. 


'Tough 

Flegm, 

Terns 

prov-o^eSi 

Dead 

Child)  & 

afterbirth 

Vomiing) 

Melan- 

cholly, 

y enema  Hs 

Beafls, 

Fainting 

and 

SvpominZi 
GumS) 
Gout) 
Marlas  in. 
the  Fact) 
Toothachy 
Fains  in 

theJoyntSy 
Headachy 
pains  of 
the  Belly 
&Breafiy 
Falling- 
ficknef) 
Stininng 

WateY) 
Cramps  & 
Convulji- 
enS) 


groweth  alfo  in  many  raoift  and  watery  places 

of  this  Land.  .  * 

The  fccond  is  found  wild  in  Sffex  m  diverf 

places  by  the  High-way  from  Londen  to  Cde- 
chelier,  and  thereabouts  more  abundantly  than 
in  other  Countries, and  is  alto  planted.in  their 
Gardens  in  £jfex> 

Time» 

They  tlower  in  the  latter  end  of  Summers 

about  ^uguji. 

Venues  and  Vje. 

7)’ofcorides  faith,  That  Pf«y-roy^t/  maketh 
thin,  tough  Flegm,  warmeththe  coldnels  of 
any  part  whereto  it  is  apylied,  and  digefteth 
raw  or  corrupt  matter:  Being  boyled  &  drunk, 
it  provoketh  Womens  Courfes  and  expeileth 
the  dead  Child  and  afterbirth,  and  ftaieth  the 
difpofitionto  Vomit,  being  taken  in  Water 
and  Vinegar  mingled  together.  And  being 
mingled  with  Honey  and  Salt  it  avoideth 
riegm  out  of  the  Lungs,  and  purge-th  Melan- 
cholly  by  the  Stool.  Drunk  with  Wine  it  hel- 
peth  fuch  as  are  bitten  or  ftung  with  Ven^ 
mous  Beafts :  and  applied  to  the  Noftrils  with 
Vinegar,  reviveth  thofe  that  are  fainting  and 
fwouning.  Being  dried  and  burnt  it  ftiengthe 
neth  the  Gums  j  It  is  helpful  to  thofe  that  are 
troubled  with  the  Gout  being  applied  of  it  felf 
to  the  place  until  it  wax  red  :  and  applied  ina 
Plaifter,  it  taketh  away  fpots  or  marks  in  the 
Face  :  Applied  with  Salt,  it  profiteth  t^fc 
that  are  Splenetick  or  Liver-grown.  The  De- 
codlion  doth  help  the  Itch,if  waihed  therwith. 
Being  put  into  Baths  for  W omen  to  fit  there¬ 
in,  it  hclpeth  the  Swelling  and  hardnefs  of  the 
Mother.  The  green  Herb  bruifed  and  put  in¬ 
to  V  inegar  clenleth  foul  Ulcers,  and  taketh  a- 

way  the  marks  and  bruifes  of  blows  al^ut-thc 

Eyes,  and  aU  difcolourings  of  the  Face  by 
fire,  yea  and  the  Leprofie,  being  drunk  and 
outwardly  applied  :  Boyled  im-Wme  with 
Honey  and  Salt,  it  hclpeth  the  Toothach.  It 
helpeth  the  cold  Griefs  of  the  Joynts,  taking 
away  the  pains,  and  warming  the  cold  parts, 
being  faft  bound  to  the  place  after  a  bathing, 
or  fweating  in  an  hot  houf.  Fliny  addeth  that 
'Pcmy-royal  and  Mints  together  help  fain- 
tings  or  fwounings,  being  put  into  Vinegar, 
and  put  to  the  Noftrils  to  be  fmellcd  unto,  or 
a  little  thereof  put  into  the  Mouth.  It  eafeth 
the  Hcadach,  and  the  pains  of  the  Brcaft  and 
Belly,  ftayeth  the  gnawing  of  the  Stomach, and 
inward  pains  of  the  Bowels  j  being  drunk  in 
Wine  it  provoketh  Womens  Courfes,  and  ex- 
pcllcth  the  dead  child  and  afterbirth  :  Being 
given  in  Wine  it  helpeth  the  Falling-ficknefs.* 
Put  into  unwholfom  or  (linking  Water  that 
men  muft  drink  (as  at  Sea,  and  where  other 
cannot  be  had)  it  maketh  them  the  lei's  hurt¬ 
ful  :  It  helpeth  Cramps  or  Convulfions  of  the 
Sinews  being  applied  with  Honey,  Salt,  and 
Vinegar.  It  is  very  effectual  for  the  Cough, 
being  boyled  in  Milk  and  drunk,  and  for  Ul¬ 


cers  or  Sores  in  the  Mouth.  TMathiolm  faith. 
The  Decodioii  t^reof  being,  drunk,  helpeth 
the  Jaundice  and  Dcopfie,  and  all  pains  of  the 
Head  and  Sinews  that  come  of  a  cold  caufjand 
that  it  helpeth  to  clear  and  quicken  the  Eye- 
fight.  Applied  to  the  TJoftrils  of  thofe  that 
have  the  Falling-ficknefs,  or  the  Lethargy,  or 
put  into  the  Mouth,  it  helpeth  them  much, 
being  bruifed  and  with  Vinegar  applied. 
And  applied  with  Barley  Meal,  it  hdpeth 
Burnings  by  fire,  and  put  into  the  Ears,ca(eth 
the  pains  of  them. 

T he  Herb  is  under  Venus. , 

Peony,  Maf.  ^ 
Femina, 

Defeription. 

THe  Male  Peony  rifeth  up  with  many 
brownilh'Stalks,  whereon  grow  many  fair 
green  and  fofntimes  reddilh  Lcavs,  one  fet  a- 
gainfi  another  upon  a  Stalk  without  any  parti¬ 
cular  devifion  in  the  Leaf  at  all.  The  Flo¬ 
wers  (land  at  the  tops  of  the  Stalks,  confifting 
of  five  or  fix  broad  Leavs,  of^  fair  purplilh 
red  colour,  with  many  yellow  threds  in  the 
middle  (landing  about  the  Head,  which  after 
rifeth  to  be  the  Seed  V e(rels,devided  into  two, 
three,  or  four  rough  crooked  Pods  like  Horns, 
which  being  ful  ripe,  ©pen,  and  turn  them- 
felves  down  one  edge  to  another  backward, 
(hewing  within  them  diverf  round,  black  (hi- 
ningSeed,  having  alfo  many  red  or  Crimfon 
grains,  intermixed  with  the  black,  whereby 
it  maketh  a  very  pretty  (hew.  The  Roots  are 
great,  thick,  and  long,  fpreading  and ‘running 
down  rcafonablc  deep  in  the  Ground. 

The  ordinary  'Female  Peony  hath  maiiy 
Stalks  and  more  Leavs  on  them  than  the  Male: 
the  Leavs  not  fo  large  but  nicked  diverfly  on 
the  edges,  fome  with  great  and  deep,  others 
with  Gnaller  cuts  and  devifions,  of  a  dark  ©c 
dead  green  colour.  The  Flowers  are  of  a 
(Irong  heady  fcent,'mo(l  ufualhTmallcr  ^dof 
a  more  purple  colour  than  the  >  t  ac,  with  yel¬ 
low  thrums  about  the  Head  as  the  Male 
hath.  The  Seed  VeCTels  are  like  Horns  as  in 
the  Male,  but  fmaller,  the  Seed  alfo  is  black 
but  Icfs  (hining.  The  Roots  confift  of  many 
thick  and  (hort  tuberous  clogs,  faftned  at  the 
ends  of  long  firings  and  all  from  the  Head  of 
the  Root  which  is  thick  and  (hort,  and  of  the 
like  feent  with  the  Male. 

Place  and  Time. 

They  grow  in  Gardens  j  and  Flower  ufually 
about  May. 

Vermes  and  Vfe. 

The  Root  of  the  Male  Peony  frc(h  gathered, 
hath  been  fpund  by  experience  to  cure  the 


Sore 
Mouth) 
JaundicCy 
Dropficy 
pains  of 
the  Head 
&Sinewsy 
Eyeffghty 

Lethargyy 

Burnings. 


The  Englijh  TbjJitian, 


9i 


r, tiling 


iVemai 
nc 
in 
birth  i 
Mother, 
EphMtci, 
or  the 
Night- 
Marc, 
Melail- 
sholticl( 

Dt  earns. 


Talling-fickncfs  j  but  the  fureft  way  is  (be- 
lidcs  hanging  it  about  the  Neck,  by  which 
Children  have  beet  *  ured)  to  take  the  Root 
of  the  Male  Peony  vvaflted  clean  and  llamped 
fomwhat  fmal,  and  lay  it  to  infufe  in  Sack  for 
twenty  four  llours,  at  the  leaft,  after  ftrain 
it,  and  take  firfland  laft,  morning  and  eve¬ 
ning  a  good  draught  for  fundiy  daics  together 
before  and  after  a  full  Moon,  and  this  will  al- 
fo  cure  flld^r  perfons,  if  the  'Difcafe  be  not 
grown  too  old  and  pait  cure,  efpecially  if  there 
be  a  due  and  orderly  preparation  of  the  Body, 
with  Pofl'et  drink  made  ofBctony  &c.  The 
Root  is  alfd  cfFcftual  for  Women  that  are  not 
not  elenfed  fufficiently  clenfcd  after  Child-birth,  and  fuch 
Child-  are  troubled  with  the  Mother  j  for  which 
likcwife  the  black  Seed  beaten  to  Ponder  and 
given  in  Wine,  is  alfo  available.  The  black 
Seed  alfo  taken  before  bed  time,  and  in  the 
morning.  Is  very  effectual  for  fuch  as  in  their 
flccp  are  troubled  with  the  Difeaf  called  Ephi- 
altes  or  Incubiis,hut  we  do  commonly  cal  it  the 
Niehc-Mare  i  a  difeaf  which  Melancholly 
perions  are  fubjeft  unto  J  It  is  alfo  good  a- 
ainft  Mclanchollick  Dreams.  TheDiftil- 
cd  water,  or  Syrup  made  of  the  Flowers,  wor- 
keththc  lame  effedts  that  the  Root  and  the 
Seed  do,  although  more  wealtly.  The  Female 
is  often  afed  for  the  purpofes  aforefaid,  by 
tcafon  the  Male  is  fo  fcarcc  a  Plant  that  it  is 
pdiTelTedby  feyv,  and  thofe^^great  Lovers  of 
Rarities  in  this  kind. 

It  isaiiHetb  of  the  Sun,  and  under  the 
Lyon,  Phyfitians  fay  Male  Peony  Roots  arc 
belt,  tut  Dr.  T{eaJo7i  told  me,  male  Peony 
was  beft  for  men,  and  female  Peony  for  wo¬ 
men,  and  he  defircs  to  be  judged  by  his  bro¬ 
ther  Dr.  Experience.  The  Roots  are  held  to 
be  ofraoft  Vertue,  then  the  Seeds  next  fhc 
Flowers,  andlaft  of  all  the  Lcavs. 

■  ^  ^ ^ 'll :  4*  ^  ^  ^  *1? 

Pepperwortj  or  Dit- 
tander. 

Beferiptian. 

O Ur  common  Pepper-wort  feudeth  forth 
fomwhat  long  and  broad  Leavs ,  of  a 
light  blewilh  green  colour,  finely  dented  about 
the  edges,  and  pointed  at  the  ends,  handing 
upon  round  hard  Stalks  three  or  four  foot 
high,  fprcading.many  Branches  on  all  fidcs, 
and  having  many  fmal  white  Flowers  at  the 
tops  of  them,  after  which  follow  fmall  Seed  in 
fmall  Heads  : '  The  Root  is  header  running 
much  under  ground,  and  {hooting  up  again 
in  many  places  j  and  both  Leavs  and  Root,  i 
arc  very  hot  and  lliarp  of  tall  like  Pepper,  for 
which  cauf  it  took  the  name. 


Tlace. 

It  grovveth  Naturally  in  many  places  of  this 
Land,  as  at  Clare  in  Ejjex,  neer  dfo  unto  Ex- 
ceter  in  ^evonjhire  3  upon  T{pche(icr  com¬ 
mon  in  Kent  in  Lancajhire  and  diverf  other 
places  j  but  is  ufually  kept  in  Gardens. 

Time. 

It  Flowreth  in  the  end  of  June,  and  in 
/«{)'• 

Vertues  and  ufe 

Pliny  zxAPaulus  <^gineta  hj  that  Pepper- 
wort  is  vet  j  effcdusl  fot  the  Sciatica,  or  any  Sciatica, 
other  Gout  or  pain  in  the  Joynts,  or  any  o-  Gout, 
ther  inveterate  grief  i  the  Lcavs  hereof  tohe  pains  m 
bruifed  and  mixed  with  old  Hogs  greafe  arid  the  Joynts, 
applied  to  the  place  j  and  to  continue  thereon  Di/co/o«- 
four  hours  in  Men,  and  twoToufs'ki  women,  rings  of 
the  place  being  afterwards  bathed  with  Wine  the  Sl^in, 
and  Oyl  mixed  together,  and  then  wrapped  Marias  eit* 
with  Wool  or  Skins  after  they  have  fweat  adit-  Scars  by 
tie.  It  alfo  aipendeth  the  Deformities  or  dif-  Burning, 
colourings  of  the  Skin,  and  hclpeth  to  take  a-  Speedy 
way  Marks,  Scars,  and  Scabs,  or  the  foui  Delivery,  ' 
marks  of  burning  with  fire  or  iron.,  The  juyee 
hereof  is  in  fomc  places  ufed  to  be  given  in  Ale 
to  drink  to  women  with  child,to  procure  them 
a  fpeedy  delivery  in  Travail. 

^Here’s  another  Martial  Herb  for  you,  make 
much  of  it.  ' 

,  Perwinkle. 

Befeription. 

THe  common  fort  hereof  hath  many  Bran,- 
ches  trayling,  or  running  upon  the 
ground  (hooting  out  fmal  Fibres  at  the 
Joynts  as  it  runneth,takingthercby  hold  in  the 
ground  and  Rooteth  in  diverf  places ,  At  the 
j  oynts  of  thefe  Branches  hand  two  fmall  dark 
green  Ihining  Leavs,  fomwhat  like  Bay  Leavs, 
but  Imaller,  and  with  them  come,  forth  alfo 
the  Flowers  (one  at  a  JoynC;{landing  upon  a 
tender  Footftalk)  being  fomwhat  long  and  - 
hollow,pa^ted‘at  the  bi'inis,romtimes  into  four 
fomtimesfive  Leav;s,  the  moft  ordinary  fort 
arc  of  a  pale  blue  colour,,  fome  are  pure  white, 
and  fome  of  a  dark  reddilh  Purple  colour.  The 
Root  is  little  bigger  than  a  Ru{h,  bulbing  in 
the  ground,  and  creeping  with  his  Branches 
far  about,  whereby  it  quickly  poiTelTcth  a  great 
comp^fs,  and  is  therfore  mou  uilially  planted 
under  Hedges,  where  4t  may  have  room  to 
run. 

.  Tlace. 

Thofe  with  the  pale  blue,  and  thofc  with 
the  white  Flowers  grow  in  Woods  and  Or¬ 
chards  by  the  Hedg  fides  in  diverfe  places  of  * 
this  Land.  But  thofe  with  the  Purple  Flowers 
in  Gaedens  only.  ^ 


E  e 


Timei, 


1 94 


The  EngUp  <Phyfit  Ian. 


Stanch 
bleeding) 
Vh'omenc 
CourfeS) 
Flux  of 
the  BeUy‘ 


Time. 

They  Flower  in  M ar eih^ni  April. 

Venues  ’^fe. 

The  Perwincle  is  a  great  binder,  flaying 
bleeding  both  at  Mouth  and  N  ofe,  if  fome  of 
the  Leavs  be  chewed  :  The  French  ufc  it  to 
flay  Womens  Courfes.  ViofeorideSi  Galen) 
zndt^lineta  commend  it  againft  the  Lask, 
and  Fluxes  of  the  Belly  to  be  drunk  in  Wine. 

Venus  ov/ns  this  Herb,  and  faith  that  the 
Xeavs  eaten  by  man  and  wife  together,  cau-  < , 
feth  lore  between  them. 

St.  Peters-wort. 


wort,  but  fom what  weak,  and  therefore  more 
feldomufed.  Two  drams  of  the  Seed  taken  at 
a  time  in  Honeyed  water,  purgeth  Chollerick 
Humors  (as  [iith  Diofeondes,  Fliny,  and  Get. 
len)  and  thereby  helpeth  thofe  that  are  trou- 
bled  with  the  The  Leavs  are  ufed 

as  St.  Johns  wort,  to  help  thofe  places  of  the 
Body  that  have  been  biumt  with  Fire. 

There  is  not  a  flraw  to  chufe  between  this 
and  St.  Johns  wort,  only  St.  Pet^r  muft  have 
it,  left  he  ftiould  lack  Pot-herbs. 

Pimpernel. 


T{jime. 

IF  Super ftition  had  not  been  the  Father  of 
Tradition,  as  well  as  Ignorance  the  Mo¬ 
ther  of  Devotion,  this  Herb  as  well  as  St. 
Johns  wort  had  found  fome  other  name  to  be 
known  by  5  but  we  may  fay  of  our  Fore-fa¬ 
thers  as  St.  Paul  of  the  Mhenians^l  perceive 
that  in  many  things  you  arc  too  Superftitious: 
Yet  feing  it  is  come  to  that  oafs,  that  Cuftom 
having  gotten  pofleffion  pleads  Prefeription 
for  the  name,  I  ftiall  let  it  pafs,  and  come  to 
the  Defeription  of  the  Herb,  which  take  as 
foUoweth. 

Vefeription. 

It  rifeth  up  with  fquare  upright  Stalks  fop 
the  moft  part,  fomwhat  greater  and  higher 
than  St.  Johns  wort  (and  good  reafon  to^  bt. 
Peter  being  the  greater  Apoftle  (ask  the  1  ope 
clfe)  for  though  God  would  have  the  Saints 
equal,  the  Pope  is  of  another  Opinion)  but 
brown  in  the  fame  manner,  having  two  Lwvs 
at  every  Joynt,  fomwhat  like,  but  larger  than 
St.  Johns  wort,  and  a  little  rounder  pointed 
with  few  or  no  Holes  to  be  feen  therein,  ^d 
having  fomtimes  fome  fmaller  Leavs  riling 
from  the  Bofom  of  the  greater,and  fomtimes  a 
little  hairy  sdfo :  At  the  tops  of  the  Smks 
Hand  many  Starlike  Flowers,  with  yellow 
threds  in  the  middle  very  like  thofe  of  ot. 
-Johns  wort,  infomuch  that  this  is  hardly  dil- 
cemedfrom  it  but  only  by  the  largenefs  of 
height,  the  Seed  being  alfo  alike  in  both.  The 
Koot  abideth  long  fending  forth  new  Ihoots  c- 
very  ycer. 

Place. 

It  groweth  in  many  Groves  and  fmall  low 
Woods,  in  diverf  places  of  this  Land,  as  in 
J^ent)  Huntingtoni  Cambridg)  and  T^othamp- 
tenJhireSj  as  alfo  ncer  water  Courfes  mother 
places* 

Time. 

*  It  Flowreth  in  June  and  J«/y,  and  the  Seed 

is  ripe  in  Augu^. 

Venues  and  Vfe. 

,  It  is  of  the  fame  property  with  St.  Johns 


Difeription. 

Common  Pimpernel  hath  diverfe  weak 
fquare  Stalks  lying  on  the  ground  befet 
all  along  with  two  fmal  and  imoft  round 
Leavs  at  every  Joynt  one  againft  another,very 
like  Chickweed,  but  hath  no  Footftalks,  for 
the  Leavs  do  as  it  were  compafs  the  S.talk  : 

The  Flowers  ftand  fing’y  each  by  themfelvs  at 
them  and  the  Stalks,  conlifting  of  five  round 
fmall  pointed  Leavs  of  a  fine  pale  red  colour, 
tending  to  an  Orange, with  fo  many  threds  in 
the  middle,  in  whofe  places  fucceed,  fmooth 
round  Heads,  wherein  is  contained  fmal  Seed. 

The  Root  is  fmal  and  fibrous  periftung  every 
yeer. 

Place. 

It  groweth  every  where  almoft,  as  well  ia 
the  Meadows  and  Cornfields,  as  by  the  Way- 
fides,  and  in  Gardens  arifing  of  it  felf. 

Time. 

It  Flowreth  from  May  unto  Augufly  and  the 
Seed  ripeneth  in  the  mean  time  and  falleth. 

Venues  and  i>fe. 

This  is  of  a  clenfing  and  attpaftive  qua¬ 
lity,  whereby  it  draweth  forth  Thorns  or  Thorns  or 
Splinters,  or  other  fuch  like  things  gotten  in-  Splintersy 
to  the  Flelli,  and  put  up  into  the  Noftrils  purgeth 
purgeth  the  Head  j  and  Galen  faith  alfo  they  the  Heady 
have  a  drying  faculty,  whereby  they  are  good  munds  & 
to  foder  the  lips  of  Wounds,  and  to  clenffoul  vlcersy 
Ulcers.  The  diftilled  Water  or  juyee  is  much  clenfeth 
efteemed  by  French  Dames  toclenfethe  Skin  facey 
from  any  roughnefs,  deformity,  or  difeolou-  plague 
ring  thereof :  Being  boyled  in  Wine,  and  Peftilenti- 
given  to  drink,  it  is  a  good  Remedy  a-  al  Ee avers 
gainft  the  Plague,  and  other  Peftilential  Fea-  Venemous 
vers,  if  the  Party  after  taking  it  warm  lie  in  Be afls, 
his  bed  and  fweat  for  two  hours  after,  and  ufe  Mad  Dogs 
the  lame  twice  at  leaft.  It  helpeth  alfo  all  ftin-  bitingy 

gings  and  bitings  of  Venemous  Bealls  or  mad  Obftru- 
Dogs,  being  ufed  inwardly  and  applied  out-  ^ionsy 
wardly :  The  fame  alfo  openeth  the  Obftru-  Vrincy 
aionsefthe  Liver,  and  is  very  available  Stone  & 
gainft  the  Infirmities  of  the  Rems,  it  prove-  Gravely 
keth  Urine, and  helpeth  to  expel  the  Stone  and 
Gravel  out  of  the  Kidneys  and  Bladder,  and 

helpeth 


T7;e  EngUp}  Thyptian. 


95 


v/oundi  helpeth  much  in  all  inward  Wounds  and  Ul- 
Ulu'fS)  e<rs.  The  Decodion  or  diftilied  Water  is  no 
Clouds  or  lefs  efFedual  to  be  applied  to  all  Wounds  that 
in  are  frcfti  and  green,  or  old  filthy  fretting  and 
fheEyes,  running  Ulcers,  which  it  very  effeftually  cu- 
Joothachi  reth  inihort  fpaces.  A  little  Honey  mixed 
}iemor~  with  thejuyce  and  dropped  into  the  Eyes  clen- 
^thofds*  feth  them  from  cloudy  miftsj  or  thick  Films 
which  grow  over  them  and  hinder  the  fight  r 
It  helpeth  the  Toothach  being  dropped  into 
the  Ear  on  the  contrary  fide  of  the  pain.  It  is 
alfo  eftedual  to  eaf  the  pains  of  the  Hemor¬ 
rhoids  or  Piles. 

'  Ground  Pine^  or  Cha- 
mepitys. 


ment  or  delivery  before  the  time  t  It  is  as  effe- 
dual  alfo  in  all  pains  and  Difeafes  of  the 
Joynts,  as  Gouts,  Cramps,  Palfeys,  Sciatica, 
and  Aches  >  either  the  Decodion  of  the  Hsrb 
in’Wine taken  inwardly,  or  applied  outward- 
ly,  or  both  for  fome  time  together,  for  which  "'Y 
purpofe  the  Pills  made  with  the  Pouder  of 
Ground  Pine,  and  of  Hermodadils  with  Ve- 
nice  Turpentine  are  very  effedual.  Thefe 
Pills  alfo  are  fpccial  good  for  thofe  that  have 
the  Dropfie,  to  be  continued  for  fome  time. 

The  fame  is  a  fpecial  good  help  for  the  Jaun- 
dice,  and  for  griping  pains  in  the  Joynts,  Bel- 
]y,  or  inward  parts }  It  helpeth  alio  all  Dilea-  p  ic 
fes  of  the  Brain  proceeding  of  cold  and  j  Pleg-  ’ 


matick  Humors  and  Dift illations,  as  alfo  for 


Bna^Si 


jyefcripiiofi. 

OUr  common  Ground  Fine  groweth  low, 
feldom  rifing  above  an  handbreadth 
hi^h,  (hooting  forth  diverf  final  Branches,  fet 
whh  (lender  final  long  narrow  grayifli  or  whi- 
tifh  Leavs  fomwhat  hairyj  and  devided  into 
three  parts  many  times  many  buftiing  together 
at  a  Joynt,  and  fomtinies  fome  growing  fcat- 
teredly  upon  the  Stalks,  fmelling  fomwhat 
ftrong  like  unto  Rorin  5  the  Flowers  are 
fomwhat  final  and  of  a  pale  yellow  colour  gro- 
wing  from  the  Joynts  of  the  Stalks  all 
among  the  Leavs,  after  which  come  finall, 
long,  and  round  Husks  c  The  Root  is  final 
woody  pcriftiing  every  yeer. 

VlMC. 

It  groweth  more  plentifully  in  than  in 
any  other  Country  of  this  Land  J  as  namely, 
in  many  places  from  on  this  fide  Vrrrtfo'rdi  a- 
long  to  Southflect,  Cothurni  and  lipchelier jznd 
upon  Chattam  down  hard  by  the  Beaepn,  and 
half  a  mile  from  Roche fter  in  a  Field  nigh  a 
Houf  called  Selfey> 

Tme- 

It  Flowreth  and  giveth  Seed  in  the  Summer 
Months. 

VertHW  and  Ufe> 

The  Decoflion  of  Ground  Pine  drunk, doth 


thePalling-ficknefs.  It  is  an  efpecial  Remedy  ^ 
for  the  Poyfon  of  the  Aconites  ot  all  lorts,  and  ■ 

other  poifonful  Herbs,  as  alfo  againft  the 
,  {linking  of  any  Venemous  Creature  i  It  is  a  , »  « 
good  Remedy  for  a  cold  Cough,  efpeciallyin 
the  beginning.  For  all  this  purpofes  afore- 
laid,  the  Herb  being  tunned  up  in  new  Drink 
and  drunk  is  almoft  as  effedual,  but  far  more 
acceptable  to  weak  and  dainty  Stomachs.  The 
Diftilied  Water  of  the  Herb  hath  the  fame  ef- 
feds,  but  more  weakly.  The  Conferve  of  the 
Flowers  doth  the  like,  which  dMathiolus  much 
commendeth  againft  the  Palfey.  The  green 
Herb  or  the  Deco  dion  thereof  being  applied, 
diffolveth  the  hardnefs  of  Womens  Breafts, 
and  all  other  hard  Swellings  in  any  other  part 
of  the  Body.  The  green  Herb  alfo  applied,  or 
the  juyee  thereof  with  fome  Honey,  not  only 
clenfeth  putrid,  {linking  foul  and  Malignant 
Ulcers  and  Sores  of  all  forts,  but  healeth  and 
fodcreth  up  the  lips  of  green  Wounds  in  any 
part  alfo. 

Let  Women  forbear  it  if  they  be  with 
Child,  for  it  works  violently  upon  the  Foe- 
mininepartj  znd^ars  owns  it,  I  tellthetii 
but  fo. 

Plantane. 


'^His  groweth  fo  familiarly  in  Meadflws 
5  ,  wonderfully  prevail  againft  the  Strangury  or  j  1  and  Fields,  and  by  Pathways,  and  is  fo 

oTSdi-  iiiward  pains  ari/ing  from  the  Difeafes  of  |  well  known  that  it  needeth  no  Defeription. 


ObP’fuSli' 

msy 
Mother^ 
Womens^ 
CcurfeS) 
Dead 


the  Reins  and  Urine,  and  is  efpecial  good  for 
all  Obftrudions  of  the  Liver  and  Spleen 
and  gently  openeth  the  Body ,  for  which 
purpofe  they  were  wont  in  foimer  times 
to  make  Pills  with  the  Pouder  thereof. 


ChUd  and  the  Purple  Figs.  It  marveiloufly  helpeth 
Afterbirth  all  the  Difeafes  of  the  Mother  ufed  inwardly, 
or  applied  outwardly,  procuring  Womens 
Courles,  and  expelling  the  dead  Child  and  af¬ 
terbirth,  yea  it  is  fo  powerful  upon  thofe  Fe¬ 
minine  parts  that  it  is  utterly  forbidden  to 
Women  with  Child,  in  that  it  will  cauf  abort- 


It  is  in  its  beauty  about  Junet  and  the  Seed 
ripeneth  {hortly  after. 

Vertues  and  Vfe. 

Thejuyce  of  Plantane  clarified  and  drunk  pains  in 
for  diverf  daies  together,  either  of  it  felf  or  in  t\,c  Guts, 
other  drink  prevaileth  wonderfully  againft  all 
tormenti  or  Excoriations  in  the  Guts  or  Bo-  ^  of 
wels,  helpeth  the  diftillations  of  Rhewm  Rhervtn, 
from  the  Head,  ond  ftaicth  all  manner  of  p luxes. 
Fluxes  even  Womens  Courfes  when  they  flow  eirwomens 
too  abundantly  j  It  is  good  to  flay  fpitting  of  Cow  fes, 

E  e  2.  Blood, 


1^6 


The  Efiglijh  ^hyfttian. 


Jpittingi  Bloodj  aiid  all  other  Bleedings  at  the  Mouthy 
Blood  oT  or  the  making  of  foul  or  bloody  water  by  rea- 
Bleeding  fon  of  any  Ulcer  in  the  Reins  or  Bladder,  and 
Moicth,  alfo  ftayeth  the  too  free  bleeding  of  Wounds. 
or  Nofe  It  is  held  an  efpccial  Remedy  for  thofc  that  are 
or  of  troubled  with  the  Phtifick,  or  Confumption 
'  Wounds i  of  the  Lungs,  or  Ulcers  in  the  Lungs,  or 

'Goughs  that  come  of  heat.  The  Decoction 
ConfumO  or  Pouder  of  the  Roots  or  Seed ,  is  much  more 
,  iton  or  Vl-  binding  for  all  the  purpofes  aforefaid  than  the 
cersin  the  Lavs  f  -T^iofeorides  (-dkh^iThax  three  Roots 
htmgs,  boyled  in  Wine  and  taken  helpeth  the  T ertiSn 
Tcrtiun  Ague,  and  four  the  Quartan  Ague  :  But  (let- 
Ague,  ting  pafs  the  number  as  Fabulous)  I  conceive 
T)ropjiCi&  the  Decodtion  of  diverf  Roots  may  be  efFe£tu- 
F  aUing-  al.  The  Herb  (but  efpecially  the  Seed)  is 
jicline^i  held  to  be  profitabh  againft  the  Dropfie,  the 
Tooihachj  Falling-hcknefs,the  yellow  Jaundice,and  ftop- 
f  in  and  pings  of  the  Liver  and  Reins.  The  Roots  of 
Tveb  in  the  Plantane-  and  Pellitory  of  Spain  beaten  to 
^yeS}  Pouder  and  put  into  hollow  Teeth,  taketh  a- 
fains  in  vvay  the  pains  of  them  :  The  clarifiedjuyce  or 
the  Ear  S3  diftilled  Water  dropped  into  the  Eyes  cooleth 
In(iamati-  the  Infiamations  in  them,  and  taketh  away  the 
onS)  ^  Pin  and  Web  5  and  dropped  into  the  Ears 
Burning  or  cafeth  pains  in  them,  and  helpeth  and  refto- 
Scaldmgy  reth  the  Hearing :  The  fame  alfo  with 
JioUova  juyee  of  Houflcek  is  profitable  againft  all  In- 
ItlcerSi  flamations  and  breakings  out  in  the  Skin,  and 
Canl^ersy  againft  Burnings  or  Scaldings  by  fire  or  Wa- 
and  fore  ter.  The  Juyee  or  Dccoftion  made  cither  of 
Mouth3  or  it  felf  or  other  things  of  like  nature  is  of  much 
frivy  ufe  and  good  effetft  for  old  and  hollow  Ulcers, 
farts,  that  are  hard  to  be  cured,  and  for  Cankers  and 
Files, '  Sores  in  the  Mouth  or  privy  parts  of  Man  or 
fains  of  Woman  j  and  helpeth  alio  the  pSins  of  the 
the  Head,  Piles  in  the  Fundament.  The  Juyee  mixed 
Lunacy  &  with  Oyl  of  Rofes,  and  the  Temples  and  For- 
fhrenfie,  head  anointed  therewith,  eafeth  the  pains  of 
Biting  of  the  Head  proceeding  from  heat,  and  helpeth 
Serpents,  Lunatick,  and  Phrenetick  perfons  very  much  5 
cr  Mad  as  alfo  the  bitings  of  Serpents  or  a  Mad  Dog : 
Dogs,  The  fame  alfo  is  profitably  applied  to  all  hot 
HotGouts  Gouts  in  the  Feet  or  Hands,  efpecially  in  the 
Bones  out  beginnii^.  It  is  alfo  good  to  be  applied  where 
of  Joynt,  any  Bone  is  out  of  Joym  to  hinder  Inflamati- 
worms  in  ons.  Swellings  and  Pains  that  prefcntly  rife 
the  Belly,  thereupon.  The  Pouder  of  the  dried  Leavs 
or  inul-  taken  in  drink,  killeth  Worms  of  the  Belly, 
cers,  and  boyled  in  Wine  killeth  Worms  that  breed 
Scabs  and  in  old  and  foul  Ulcers.  One  part  of  Plantane 
Jtcb,  W  ater,  and  two  parts  of  the  brine  of  ponder’d 

Tetters,  Beefboyled  together  and  clarified,  is  a  moft 
King"  fure  Remedy  to  heal' all  fpreading  Scabs  and 
worms.  Itch  in  the  Head  or  Body,  all  manner  of  Tet- 
Jhiftgles,-  ters,RingwormSj  the  Shingles,  and  all  other 
fretting  running  and  fietting  Sore's.  Briefly  the  Plan- 
f&rpSy  tanes  arc  fingular  good  Wound  Herbs  to  heal 
lEounds,  frefh,  or  old  Wounds  and  Sores  either  inward 
or  outward.  * 


Its  true  Myyildus  and  others  yea  almoft  all 
Aftrologo-Phyhtians  hold  this  to  be  an  Herb 
of  ’^flars-,  and  they  give  a  verillmilc  of  a  truth 
for  it  too,  ri-^-becauf  it  cures  difeafes  of  the 
Head  and  privities  which  are  under  the  Houfes 
of  Mars,  Mries,  and  Scorpio  :  All  Difeafes 
ofthe  Headcomming  of  heat  are  caufed  by 
Mai'S,  for  is  made  of  no  fuch  hot  met- 
tle,  or  at  leaft  deals  in  inferior  parts.  The 
truth  is,  it  is  under  the  command  of  (^enm,znd. 
cures  the  Head  by  Antipathy  to  Mars,  and  the 
Privities  by  Sympathy  to  Venus,  neither  is 
there  hardly  a  Martial  Difeaf  but  it  cures.  If 

I  were  to  fortifie  my  Body  againft  a  Martial 

Difeaf  I  would  do  it  by  this  Herb  as  foon 
as  by  any,  and  may  do  it  fit  may  be)  when 
time  fhal  ferve. 

Plums. 

THefe  are  fo  well  known  that  they  need  no 
Defeription. 

Venues  and  V  fe. 

As  there  is  great  divcrficy  of  the  kinds,  fo  is 
there  in  the  operations  of  Plums/or  fomc  that 
aiefwcet,moiftenthe  Stomach -and  make  the 
Belly  folublej  thofc  that  aref^wr  quenfchjhirft  Upew  the 
more  and  bind  the  Belly  ;  the  moift  and'Ware-  BeUy, 
rifh  do  fooneft  corrupt  in  the  Stomach,  but  Quench 
the  firm  do  nourifti  more  and  offend  lefs:  The  Thirji,  & 
dried  Fruit  fold  by  the  Grocers  under  the  f  ind  the 
name  of  Vamas^  Prunes,  do  Comv/hatlooCevi.  Belly, 
the  Belly,  and  being  ftewed  are  often  ufed  both  frocu'rg 
in  health  and  ficknefs,to  rcllifli  the  Mouth  and  Appetite, 
Stomach  to  procure  Appetite,  and  a  little  to^Uay 
open  the  Body,  allay  Choller,  and  cool  the  Chollcr, 
Stomach:  Pte-trec  Leavs  boyled  in  Wme,^Ceolthe 
is  good  to  wafh  and  gargle  the  Mouth  ocniStemach, 
Throat  to  dry  the  Flux  of  Rhewm  coming  to  'Khervm, 
the  Pallat,  Gums,  or  Almonds  of  the  Ears.  Stone, 

The  Gum  ofthe  Trees  is  good  to  break  the  Tetters, & 
Stone.  The  Gum  or  Leavs  boyled  in  Vine-  Ring- 
gar  and  applied,  killeth  Tetters  and  Ring-  rvorms, 
worms.  dMathioliis  [znh.  The  Oyl  prefiedTi/cj, 
out  of  the  Kernels  of  the  Stones,  as  Oyl  o{  Ulcers, 
Almonds  is  made,is  good  againft  the  inflamed  Hoarfnel?, 
Piles,  the  Tumors  or  Swellings  of  Ulcetss  and 'pains 
Hoarfnefs  of  the  voice,  roughnefs  of  the  mtheEars 
Tongue  and  Throat,  andllkewifc  the  pains  Stone  and 
in  the  Ears.  And  that  five  ounces  of  the  faid  Cbollicl(^ 
Oyl  taken  with  one  ounce  of  Mufcadinc,  dri- 
veth  forth  the  Stone,  and  helpeth  the  Chol- 
lick. 

All  Plums  are  under  Venus,  and  are  like 
Women,  fome  better,  fome  worfe. 


PoIIippdj* 


The  Engltjb  fhyfttian. 


^97. 


Dryeth 

Humors, 

fnrgetb 

burnt 

Choller, 

Flegm, 

Melaa- 

cboUy, 

^tartan 

Agues, 

Spleen, 

Chollkli, 


‘t'  ‘I’ 

Pollipody  of  the 
Oak. 


Vefcnptioyu 

THis  is  a  fiTial  Herb  confvfting  of  nothin.g 
but  Roots  and  Lcavs :  bearing  nei¬ 
ther  Stalkj  Floweij  nor  Seed  as  iris 
thought.  It  hath  three  or  four  Leavs  fi¬ 
fing  from  the  Root,  every  one  finely  by  it  felt, 
of  about  a  hand  length,which  are  winged,  con- 
fifting  of  many  fmal  narrow  Lcavs,  cut  into 
the  middle  rib  {landing  on  each  fide  of  the 
Stalk,iarge  below,  and  fmaller  up  to  the  top, 
not  dented  or  notched  on  the  edges  at  all,  as 
theMjde  Fern  hathj  of  a  fad  green  colour 
and  fmooth  on  the  upper  fide,  but  on  the 
underfide  fomwhat  rough,  by  reafon  of  cer¬ 
tain  yellowilb  fpots  fet  thereon :  The 
Root  is  fmaller  than  ones  little  finger 
lying  aflope ,  or  creeping  along  under  the 
upper  cruft  of  the  earth,  brown ifh.on  the  out- 
lide,  and  greenifh  within,  of  a  fwectifh  harfh- 
nefsintall,  fet  with  certain  rough  Knags  on 
each  fide  thereof,  having  alio  much  MofiTincfs 
or  yellow  hairinefs  upon  it,  and  fome  Fibres 
underneath  it,  whereby  it  is  nouriilicd.. 

IHncc.  ’  . 

It  groweth  as  well  upon  old  rotten  flumps, 
or  trunks  of  Trees,  as  Oak,  Beech,  Hatelj 
Willow,  or  any  other,  as  in  the  Woods  under 
them  i  and  upon  olu  Mud  W^als,  as  alfo  in 
Moffie,  Stony,  and  gravelly  places,  licer  unto 
Woods  i  That  which  groweth  upon.  Oaks  is 
accounted  thebeft,  but  the  quantity  thereof 
is  fcarce  fufficient  for  the  common  ufe. 

Time. 

It  being  alwaies  green,  may  be  gathered  for 
ufe  at  any  time.  , 

yertiies  and,  ufe. 

Mefues  (who  is  called  the  Phylitians  Evan- 
gelift,  for  the  certainty  of  his  Medicines,  and 
the  truth  of  his  Opinions)  faith.  That  it  dri- 
eth  up  thin  Humors,  dkefteth  thick  and 
tough,  and  purgeth  burnt  Choller,  and  elpe- 
cially  tough  and  tliick  Flegm,  and  thin  Flegm 
alfo,  .even  from  the  Joynts  ;  and  is  therfore 
good  for  thofc  that  arc  troubled  with  Melan- 
cholly,  or  Quartan  Agues,  cfpecially  if  it  be 
taken  in  WheVj  pr  Honeyed  Water,  or  in 
Barley  water,  or  the  Broth  of  a  Chicken  with 
Epithimum,  or  with  Beets  and  Mallows.  It 
is  alfo  good  for  the  hardnefs  of  the  Spleen  and 
for  prickings  or  Stitches  in  the  iideSjas  alfo  for 
the  Chollick,  fomc  ufe  to  put  to  it  lome  Fen¬ 
nel  Seeds,  or  Annis  Seeds  or  Ginger  to  cor- 
ircCl  that  loathing  it  bringeth  to  the  Stomach, 
which  is  more  than  needeth,  it  being  a  fafe 
and  gcncleMcdicine  fit  for  al  pafons  at  al  fea- 


fons,  which  daily  experience  confirmith  j  And 
an  ounce  of  it  may  be  given  at  a  time  in  a  De-  Trouble- 
codion,  if  there  be  not  Sxna  or  fome  othte  j'gfn  (Iceps, 
ftrong  purger  put  with  it.Adram  or  two  of  the  Comb, 
Pouder  of  the  dried  Roots,  taken  falling  in  <?/ 

a  cup  of  Honeyed  water,  worketh  gently,  im  Breath, 
for  the  purpoles  aforefaid.  The  diftilled  water  and  n  hec- 
both  of  Roots  and  Lcavs  is  much  commended  fmgs, 
for  the  Quartan  Ague,  to  be  taken  for  many  Lungs, 
daies  together,  as  alfo  againft  Mtlanchoily,  phtijicl(^, 
or  fearful  or  troublefom  fleeps  or  Dreanns,  and  Member, 
with  fome  Sugar  Candy  diuolved  therein,  is  out  of 
good  againft  the  Cough,  {hortnefs  of  hsezth  Joynt, 
and  Wheelings,  and  thofe  diftillations  of  thin  poUipiis  or 
Rhewm  upon  the  Lungs,whichcauf  Phtificks,  Difcaf  in 
and  oftentimes  Confumptioris.  The  frelh  the  'kofc. 
Roots  beaten  fmai:  or  the  Pouder  of  the  dried  Chops  in 
Roots  mixed  with  Honey  and  applied  to  any  the  Fin- 
Member  that  is  out  of  Joynt,  doth  much  help  gers  or 
it:  Applied  alfo  to  the  Nofecureth  the  Dir- roer. 
eaf  called  Po/lp«5',  which  is  a  piece  of  Flclh 
growing  therein  which  in  time  ftoppeth  the 
pallbge  of  breath  through  that  Noftril  j  And 
it  helpeth  thofe  clefts  or  Chops  that  come  be¬ 
tween  the  fingers  or  Toes. 

And  why  I  pray  mull  FoUipodium  of  the 
Oak  only  be  ufed.  Gentle  Colledg  of  Phyfi- 
tians,  can  you  give  me  but  a  glimps  of  a  rea¬ 
fon  for  it  ?  is  it  only  becauf  it  is  deareft  ?  will 
you  never  leave  your  covetoufnefs  till  your 
lives  leave  you  ?  The  Truth  is,  that  which 
grows  upon  the  Earth  is  bell  (’tis  an  Herb  of 
Saturn  and  he  feldom  climbs  trees)  to  purge 
Melancholly,  if  the  humor  be  othetwife,  chufe 
your  Pollipodiiim  accordingly. 


si?  ‘I?  ^  ^  ^  ^ 

The  Poplar-Tree. 


Defeription.  ' 

T Here  are  two  fotts  of  TPoplars  vihich.  are 
moll  familiar  with  us,  Vi%:  The  Blac\, 
and  eaziVhite,  both  which  I  lhall  herp  deferibe 

■  unto  you.  ■ 

The  white  FopUr  growetfi  great  and  rcalo- 
nabie  high,covered  with  a  thick  fmooth  whitd 
Bark,  crpecially  the  Branches,  having  large 
Leavs  cut  into  fcveral  devifions  almoft  like  a 
Vine  Leaf,  but  not  of  fo  deep  a  green  on  the 
upper  fide,  and  hoary  white  underneath^  of  a 
rcalonable  good  {cent,  the  whol  form  rcprelen— 
ting  the  Leaf  of  Coltsfoot.  The  Catkins 
which  it  bringeth  forth  before  the  Lcavs,  are 
long,  and  of  a  faint  reddilh  colour,  which  fall 
away  bearing  feldom  .good  Seed  with  them. 
The  Wood  hereof  is  fmooth,  foft,  and  white, 
very  finely  waved,  whereby  it  is  much  ellec- 

The  Black  Foplrtr  groweth  hi'gher  and  llrai- 
tcr  than  the  White,  with  a  gray  ilh  Bark  bea¬ 
ring  broad  and  green  Leaves  fomwhat  like  ivy 
p  £  ^  Leaves, 


'  u 


TT'v. 
■  *’  ■ 


Leavs  not  cut  in  on  the  edges  like  the  WhitCj 
but  whol  and  dented,  ending  in  a  point,  and 
not  white  underneath ,  hanging  by  fknder 
long  Footftalks,  whichwith  the  Airare  con¬ 
tinually  ihaken  like  as  the  Afpin  Leavs  are  : 
The  Catkins  hereof  are  greater  than  of  the 
White,  compofed  of  many  rount^reen  Berries 
as  it  were  fet  together  in  a  long  Clufter,  con¬ 
taining  much  downice  matter,  which  being 
ripe  is  blown  away  with  t^e  wind  ,  The  clam¬ 
my  Buds  hereof  before  they  fpread  into  Leavs, 
arc  gathered  to  make  the  Vnguentum  Vo^u~ 
leon^  and  are  of  a  yellowifti  green  colour  and 
fmal,  fomwhat  fweet,  but  ftrong.  The  Wood 
is  fmooth,  tough,  land  white,  andeafie  to  be 
cloven  :  Onboththefe  Treesgrowethafwcet 
kind  of  Musk,  which  in  former  times  was  ufed 
to  be  put  into  fwcet  Oyntments. 

VUce- 

They  grow  in  moift  Woods  and  by  water 
fidcs  in  fundry  places  of  the  Land,  yet  the 
white  is  not  fo  frequent  as  the  other.  ^ 

Tim* 

Their  time  islikcwifc  exprefled  before,Thc 
Catkins  coming  fotth  before  the  Leavs  and 
ripen  in  the  end  of  Summer. 

Venues  and  Vfe* 

The  White  faith  Galen^  is  of  a  clen- 

fing  property:  The  weight  of  one  ounce  in 

Pouder  of  the  Bark  therepf  being  drunk  faith 

Diofeorides  is  a  Remedy  for  thofc  that  are 
Sciatica,  trouljlcd  with  the  Sciatica,  or  the  Strangury : 
Strangury,  The  juyee  of  the  Leavs  dropped  warm  into 
fmn  in  the  the  Ears  eafeth  the  pains  in  them :  The  yong 
Ears,  clammy  Buds  or  Eyes  before  they  break  out  in- 
T>utt  fight,  to  Leavs,  bruifed,  and  a  little  Honey  put  to 
Gout,  them,  is  a  good  Medicine  for  a  dull  Sight. 
Falling-  .  The  Black  Peplo’r  is  held  to  be  more  cooling 
ficline^,  than  the  White,  and  therefore  the  Leavs  brui- 
warts,  whh  Vinegar  and  applied,  helpeth  the 

Tujhes,eii'  Gout  j  The  Seed  drunk  in  Vinegar  is  held 
wheals,  good  againft  the  Falling-ficknefs,  The  Wa- 
Keat,  ter  that  droppeth  from  the  hollow  places  of 
Infia ma-  this  T ree,  taketh  away  Warts,PHfties,Wheals, 
iions,  and  other  the  like  breakings  out  in  the  Body. 
Vryeth  The  yong  black  Poplar  Buds,  faith  <Pdathio- 
Womns  bisyiie  much  ufed  by  Women  to  beautifie  their 
Milk*  hair,bruiling  them  with  frefh  Butter  and  ftrai- 
ningthem  after  they  have  been  kept  for  feme 
time  in  the  Sun.  The  Oyntment  called  Popu~ 
lean,  which  is  made  of  this  Poplar,  is  fingular 
good  for  all  heat,  or  Inflamation  in  any  part 
of  the  Body,  and  tempereth  the  heat  of 
Wounds  :  It  fs  much  ufed  to  dry  up  the  Milk 
in  Womens  Breafts,  when  they  have  weyned 
their  Children. 


4*  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^ 

Poppy. 


OP  this  1  flial  deferibe  three  kinds,  Vl%. 

The  White  and  Black,  of  the  Garden, 
and  the  Erratick,  wild  Poppy,  or  Corn  Rofe. 
Difeription* 

The  white  Toppy  hath  at  firft  four  or  five 
whitifh  green  Leavs  lying  upon  the  ground, 
which  rife  with  the  Stalk,  compafling  it  at  the 
bottom  of  them,  and  are  very  large,  much  cut 
or  torn  in  on  the  edges,  and  deiited  alfo  be- 
ildes :  The  Stalk  which  isufually  four  or  five 
foot  high,  hath  fomtimes  no  Branches  at  the 
top,&  ufually  but  two  or  three  at  moft  bearing 
every  one  but  one  Head,  wrapped  in  a  thin 
Skin,  which  boweth  down  before  it  be  ready 
to  blow,  and  then  rifing  and  being  broken,thc 
Flower  within  it  fpreadeth  it  felf  open,  and 
confifteth  of  four  very  large  White  round 
Leavs,  with  many  whitifh  round  threds  in  the 
middle,  fet  about  a  fmall  round  green  Head, 
having  a  Crovvn,  or  Star-like  cover  at  the 
Head  thereof,  which  growing  ripe  becometh 
as  large  as  a  great  Apple,  wherein  are  contai¬ 
ned  a  great  number  of  fmal  round  Seed,  in  fe-  , 
veral  partitions  or  devifions  next  unto  the  ,, 
Ihell,  the  middle  thereof  remaining  hollow 
and  empty.  All  the  whol  Plant,  both  Leavs, 
Stalks  and  Heads,  while  they  are  frefh,  yong, 
and  green,  yield  a  Milk  when  they  are  broken, 
of  an  unpleafant  bitter  taft,  almoft  ready  to 
provoke  calling,  and  of  a  flrong  heady  fmel, 
which  being  condenfate  is  called  Opium*  The 
Root  is  white,  and  woody,  perilhing  asfoon 
as  it  hath  given  ripe  Seed. 

The  Black  Poppy  little  differeth  from  the 
former,  until  it  beareth  his  Flower,  which  is 
fomwhatlefs,  and  ofablack  Purplifh  colour, 
but  without  any  purple  fpots  in  the  bottom  of 
the  Leaf.  The  Head  of  Seed  is  much  lefs  than 
the  former,  and  opencth  it  felf  a  little  round 
about  the  top  under  the  Crown,  fo  that  the 
Seed  which  is  very  black  will  fall  out  if  one 
turn  the  Head  thereof  downwards. 

The  wild  Poppy,  or  Corn  Rofe,  hath  long 
and  narrow  Leavs  very  much  cut  in  on  the  ed-. 
ges  into  many  devifions,  of  a  light  green  co¬ 
lour,  and  fomtimes  hairy  withal  j  The  Stalk 
■is  blackifh  and  hairy  alfo,  but  not  fo  tall  as  the 
Garden  kinds,  having  feme  fuch  like  Leavs 
thereon  as  grow  below,  parted  into  three  or 
four  Branches  fomtimes,  whereon  grow  fmal 
hairy  Heads  bowing  down  before  the  Skin 
break,  wherein  the  Flower  is  inclofcd,  which 
when  it  is  ful  blown  opeujis  of  afair  yellowifh  ■ 
red  or  crimfon  colour, and  in  feme  much  paler, . 
without  any  fpot  in  the  bottom  of  the  Leavs, 
having  many  black  foft  threds  in  the  middle 
compalUing  a  final  green  Head,  which  when  it 

is 


T??e  Englijh  Thyjitian 


is  ripcjis  not  bigger  than  ones  little  finger  end, 
vvherin  is  contained  much  black  Seed,  fmaller 
by  half  than  that  of  the  Garden.TheRoot  pc- 
,  rilheth  every  yeer,  and  fpringeth  again  of  its 
own  fowing.  Of  this  kind  there  is  one  lelTcr 
in  all  the  parts  thereof,  and  dilFercth  in  no¬ 
thing  elf. 

Place. 

The  Garden  kinds  do  not  naturally  grow 
wild  in  any  place,  but  are  all  fown  in  Gardens 
where  they  grow. 

The  Wild  Poppy,  or  Com  Rofe  is  plentiful 
enough,  and  many  times  too  much  in  the 
Corn  fields  of  all  Countries  through  this 
Land,  and  alfo  upon  Ditch  Banks,  and  by 
Hedg  fides :  The  fmaller  wild  kind  is  alfo 
found  in  Corn  Fields,  and  alfo  in  fome  other 
places,  but  not  fo  plentiful  as  the  former. 

Tim. 

The  Garden  kinds  are  ufually  fown  in  the 
Spring,  which  then  Flower  about  the  end  of 
May,  and  fomwhat  earlier,  if  they  fpring  of 
their  own  fowing. 

The  Wild  kinds  Flower  ufually  from 
untill  Julyi  and  the  Seed  of  them  is  ripe  foon 
after  the  Flowring. 

Tiertues  and  Ufe. 

The  Garden  Poppy  Heads  wfth  Seeds  made 
into  a  Syrup,  is  frequently  and  to  good  efFed 
Ttocuve^  ufed  to  procure  reft  and  fleep  in  the  fick  and 
(leepf  weak,  and  to  ftay  Catarrh’s  and  Defluxions 
CatarrhSj  of  hot  thin  Rhewms  from  the  Head  into  the 
and  defiu.-  Stomach,  and  upon  the  Lungs,  caufing  a  con- 
xioiis  of  tinual  Cough, the  Fore-runner  of  a  Confump- 
7(hewm  tion :  It  helpeth  alfo  Hoarfnefs  of  theThroat, 
fiayei-hi  and  when  one  hath  loft  their  veiee,  whith  the 

Haarfnefy  Oyl  of  the  Seed  doth  likewife.The  black  Seed 
Flux  of  boyled  in  Wine  and  drunk,  is  laid  alio  to  ftay 
the  BeUy  the  Flux  of  the  Belly  and  Womens  Courfes. 
eoid  The  empty  (hels  of  the  Poppy  Heads  are  ufu- 
JVomns'  ally  boyled  in  water  and  given  to  procure  reft 
Courfes,  land  fleep  J  fo  do  the  Leavs  in  the  fame  man- 
Infiamati- xycr as  alfo  if  the  Head  and  Temples  be  ba- 
ows /*»WSr.thed  with  the  Decodion  warm,  or  with  the 
Anthomes  Oyl  of  Poppies,  -the  green  Leaves  or  Heads 
Fire,  bruifed  and  applied  with  a  little  Vinegar,  or 
faints  in  made  into  a  Pultis  with  Barley  Meal,  or  Hogs 
the  Head,  Greaf,  it  cooleth  and  tempereth  al  Inflamati- 
Plmnfies,  ons,  as  alfo  the  Difeaf  called  St.  Anthonies 
Toothach,  Fire.  It  is  generally  ufed  in  T reacle  and  Me- 
thridate,  and  in  all  other  Medicines  that  are 
made  to  procure  reft  and  fleep,  and  to  eaf 
pains  in  the  Head  as  well  as  in  other  parts  j  It 
is  alfo  ufed  to  cool  Inflamations,  Agues,  or 
Phrenfies,  and  to  ftay  Defluxions  which  cauf 
e  Cough  or  Confumptiomand  alfo  other  Flu¬ 
xes  of  the  Belly,  or  Womens  Courfes  j  It  is 
alfo  put  into  hollow  Teeth  to  eaf  the  pain,and 
hath  been  found  by  experience  to  eaf  the  pain 
of  the  Gout. 

The  Wild  Poppy,  or  Corn  Rofe  {asMa- 
F ailing-  faith)  is  good  to  prevent  the  Falling- 

fclinef,  ficknefs.  The  Syrup  made  with  the  Flowers 


is  with  good  efFcd  given  to  thofe  that  have 
the  Plurefie3  and  the  dried  Flowers  alfo,  tl-Pltmfte, 
ther  boyled  in  water,  or  made  into  Ponder  Surfets, 
and  drunk  cither  in  the  Diftilled  Water  of  Agues  and 
them,  or  in  fome  other  Drink  worketh  the  like  Inflama- 
effeft.  T.  he  Diftilled  Water  of  the  Flowers, 
is  held  to  be  of  much  good  ufe  againft  Surfets, 
being  drunk  evening  and  morning  j  It  is  alfi> 
more  cooling  than  any  of  the  other  Poppies, 
and  therefore  cannot  but  be  as  cffeaual  in  hot 
Agues, Phrenfies,  and  other  Inflamations  ei¬ 
ther  inward  or  outward,  the  Syrup  or  Water 
to  be  ufed  therein,or  the  green  Leavs  ufed  out¬ 
wardly,  either  in  an  Oyntment,  as  it  is  .jn 
PopK/'eo??,  a  cooling  Oyntmcntj  or  any  other 
waies  applied.  Galenfiith  the  Seed  is  dange¬ 
rous  to  be  ufed  inwardly. . 

The  Herb  and  of  the  juyee  of  it 

is  made  Opium,  only  for  lucre  of  Money  they 
cheat  you,  and  tell  you  ’tis  a  kind  of  Tear,  or 
fome  fuch  like  thing  that  drops  from  Poppies 
when  they  weep,  and  that  is  fome  where  be¬ 
yond  the  Sea,  1  know  not  where,  beyond  the 
Moon. 


Piirflane.  . 


'^He  Garden  Purflane  (being  ufed  as  a  Sal- 
let  Herb)  is  fo  well  known  that  it  needeth 
no  Defeription  J I  flial  therefore  onlyfpeak  of 
its  Vertues,  as  followcth. 

Vermes  and  ufe. 

'■  It  is  good  to  cool  any  heat  in  the  Liver,  Cooleth  ' 
Blood,  Reins,  and  Stomach,  and  in  hot  A-  heat  of 
gues,  nothing  betters  It  ftayeth  hot  etxid  Blood  in 
Chollerick  Fluxes  of  the  Belly ,  Womens  hot  Agues, 
Courfes,  the  Whites,  and  Gonorrhea,  or  run-  ChoUericJi 
ning  of  the  Reins,  the  Diftillations  from  the  Fluxes, 
Head,  and  pains  therein  proceeding  of  heat.  Womens 
want  of  fleep,  or  the  Phrenfie.  The  Seed  is  Courfes, 
more  effectual  than  the  Herb,  and  is  of  fingu-  the  whites 
lar  good  ufe  to  cool  the  heat  and  fliarpnefs  of  Cenor- 
Urine,  and  the  outragious  Luft  of  the  Body,  rhea, 

•  Venerious  Dreams,  W  the  like,  infomuch  T>i(iiUati- 
that  the  overfrequent  ufe  hereof,  extinguiftieth  ons, 
the  Heat  and  Vertue  of  Natural  Procreation.  Phrenfie, 
The  Seed  bruifed  and  boyled  in  Wine  and  gi-  Heat  of 
ven  to  Children,  expelleth  the  Worms.  The  Tfrine, 
Juyee  ofthe  Herb  is  held  as  cfFeftual  to  all  the  Tufl,  and  i 
purpofes  aforefaid,  as  alfo  to  ftay  Vomitingsj  Venereous 
and  taken  with  fome  Sugar  or  Honey,  helpeth  'Dreams,  , 
an  old  and  dry  Cough,  fliortnefs  of  Breath,  Worms, 
and  the  Phtifick ,  and  ftayeth  immoderate  Vomiting, 
Thirft.  The  Diftilled  water  ofthe  Herb  is  old,  dry 
ufed  by  many  (as  the  more  plcafing)  with  a  Cough, 
little  Sugar,  to  work  the  fame  effeds.  The  Short 
Juyee  alfo  is  fingular  good  in  the  liAxxisxi-  Breath,  & 
ons  and  Ulcers  ofthe  fecret  parts  in  man  or  Fhtificli,^ 
woman,  as  alfo  of  the  Bowels  and  Hemor-  'Dicers, 
rhoids,  when  they  are  Ulcerous,  or  Excoria-  ’’■rt  the  fe- 
F  f  2  tions  tret  parts. 


200 


The  Biiglip  fhyjitian. 


Rednej?  of 

the  Eyes 3 

and  ' 

Inflama- 

tions, 

C'nc\,  or 

pain  in  the 

^ec\, 

Blafiings 

by  Light- 

ningy 

Burning 
.  . 

by  Gun- 

poudo'y 

Sore 

Breafsy 

Childretis 

NavUsj 

Sore 

Months, 
&  fwoUen 
Oums, 
Faftnetb 
Teeth, 
Toethach, 
Bloody 
Vrine, 
Gout, 
Cramp,  & 
ftifnc{i  of 
the  Si¬ 
news. 


tions  in  their.  The  Herb  bruifed  and  applied 
to  the’Forchead  and  Temples,  aUayeth  exce - 
five  heat  therein,  hindring  reft  and  lleep  j  and 
applied  to  the  Eyestaketh  away  the  rednels  and 
Intlamationinthem,  and  thofe  othei^  parts, 
where  Pufties,  Wheals,  Pimples,  St.  Antho¬ 
nies  Fire  and  the  like  break  elpecially 

If  a  little  Vinegar  be  put  to  it :  And  being 
laid  to  the  Neck  with  as  much  of  Galls  and 
Linfced  together,  taketh  away  the  pains  there¬ 
in,  and  the  Crick  in  the  Neck.  The  Joyce  is 
ufed  with  Oyl  of  Rofes  for  the  faid  caules,  or 
for  Blaftings  by  Lightning,  and  Burnings  by 
Gun-Pouder,  or  for  Womens  fore  Breafts,and 
t©  allay  the  heat  in  all  other  Sores  or  Hurts  : 
applied  alfo  to  the  Navels  of  Childten  that 
flick  forth,  it  helpeth  them  :  It  is  alfo  good 
for  foie  Mouths,  and  Gums  that  are  fwollen 
to  faften  loof  Teeth.  (,  rattier arin^^sith,  That 
the  diftilled  water  ufed  by  fcm.e,  took  away 
the  pain  of  their  Teeth  when  all  other  Reme¬ 
dies  failed,  and  that  the thickned  juyee  made 
in  Pills  with  the  Pouderof  Gum  Tragacanth, 
and  Arabick,  being  taken  prevaileth  much  to 
help  thofe  that  make  a  bloody  water.  Applied 
to  the  Gout,  it  eafeth  pains  thereof,  and  hel¬ 
peth  the  hardnefs  of  Sinews  if  it  come  not  of 
the  Cramp,  or  a-cold  cauf* 

’TisanHerb  of  the  Moon.  SeeLettice. 

Primrofes* 

'Hcfe  are  fo  well  known  that  they  need  no 

■“  Defeription.  '  • 

Of  the  Leavs  of  Primrofes  is  made  as  hne  a 
Salve  to  heal  green  Wounds  as  any  is  that  I 
know  :  vou  fhall  be  taught  to  make  Salves  of 

any  Herb  at  the  latta- end  of  the  Book,  make 
this  as  you  are  taught  there,  and  do  not  (you 
that  have  any  Ingenuity  in  you)  fee  your  poor 
Neighbors  go  with  wounded  Limbs  when  a 
Hal^enny  coft  will  heal  them. 

1 

Privet. 


Juyee  within  them,  and  fome  Seeds  that  are 
flat  on  the  one  fide,  with  a  hole  or  dent  there¬ 


in. 


Place. 

It  groweth  in  this  Land  in  di verf  Woods. 

Time. 

Our  Privet  Flowreth  in  June  and  July 
The  Berries  are  ripe  in  Muguft  and  Septem¬ 
ber. 

Venues  and  Vfe. 

Ft  is  little  ufed  in  Phyfick  with  us  in  thefe  . 
times,  more  than  in  Lotions  to  wafli  Sores, 
and  Sore  Mouths,  and  to  cool  Inflamations  t^fihjore 
and  dry  up  Fluxes.  Yet  Mathiolm  faith  it. 
ferveth  to  all  the  ules  for  which  Oprun  or 
Privet  is  appointed  by  Viofevricks 
Galen.  He  further  faith.  That  the  Oyl  that 
is  made  of  the  Flowers  of  Privet  infufed  ther- 
in,  and  fet  in  the  Sun,  is  fingular  good  for  the  ^'5'  Elu- 
Inflamations  ofWounds,and  for  the  Headach 
coming  of  an  hot  catif.  There  is  a  fweet  wa-  Lripamati- 
ter  alfo  diftilled  from  the  Flowers  that  is  good 
for  all  thofe  Difeafes  that  need  cooling  and 
dryingjand  therefore  helpeth  all  Fluxes  of  the  ^^fdack. 
Belly  or  Stomach.  Bloody  Fluxes,  and  Wo- 
mensCourfes,  being  efther  drunk  or  applied, 
as  alfo  for  thofe  that  void^Blood  at  their  Courjes, 
Mouth  or  at  any  other  place,  and  for  Diftil-  Voiding 
lationsofRhewms  into  the  Eyes  efpecially 
it  be  ufed  with  7 *  Rbewmm 

-  the  Eyes., 

Qiieen  ofthe  Meadows^ 
Meadow-fweet^  or 

Mead-fweet.  # 

Defeription.  -  ^ 

THc  Stalks  of  this  are  reddifh,  riling 
to  be  three  foot  high ,  fomtimes 
four  or  five  foot.,  having  at  the 
Joynts  thereof  large  winged  Leavs, 

Handing  one  above  another  at  diftances,  con- 
fifting  of  many  and  fomwhat  broad  Leavs,  fet  . 
bn  each  fide  of  a  middle  rib,beiog  hard,rough, . 
or  rugged,  crumpled  much. like  to  Elm  LeavSj 
having  alio  lorrie  fmaller  Leavs.  with  them  (as 
Agrimony  hath),fomewhat  deeply  dented  a- 
bout  the  edges, of  a  fad  green  colour  on  the  up¬ 
per  fide,  and  grailh  underneath,  of  a  pretty 
lharp  feent  and  tail,  fomwhat  like  unto 


'Defeription.  ^ 

OUr  common  Privet  is  carried  up'  with 
many  flender  Branches,  to  a  reafonable 

height  and  breadth,  to  cover  Arbours,  Bowrs,  maij.  r^i 

and  Banquetting  Houfes,  and  brought,  [  net,  and  a  Leaf  heieofpu  i  . 

wrought,  and  cut  into  many  forms,  of  Men,  ret  Wine  giyeih  ajfo  a  f 

Horfes,  Birds,  &c.  which  though  at  firft  fup- 
ported,  groweth  afterwards  ftrong  of  it  felt : 

It  beareth  long  and  narrow  green  Leavs  by 
couples,  and  fweet  fmelling  white  Flowers  in 
tufts  at  the  ends  of  the  Branches,  which  tuin 
into  fmal  black  Berries  that  have  a  Piuplilb 


the  tops  of  the  Stalks  and  Branches  Hand  ma¬ 
ny  tults  of  fmall  white  Floweis,  thruft  thick 
together,  which  fmel  much  fweetcr  than  the 
Leavs  and  in  their  places,  being  fallen, come 
crooked  and  cornered  Seed  j  The  Root  is 
fomwhat  woody,  and  blackilh  on  the  outfide 

and. 


Bleedings, 

Flftxes, 

Vomithigs 

Womens 

Courfes, 

md  the 

whites, 

^artan 

Ague, 

ChoUicli, 

Opens  the 

Belly, 

Old  Ulcers 

healeth, 

Sore 

Mouths, or 
Secrets, 
Raife  bli- 
ftcrs, 

Jnfiamati- 
m  in  ' 
the' Eyes. 


■  V 


and  biownifli  within,  with  diverfe  greater 
ft  rings,  and  leffer  Pibres  fet  thereat, of  a  ftrong 
feent^ut  nothing  fo  plcafant  as  the  Flowers 
and  Leavs  and  perilbeth  not,  but  abideth  ma¬ 
ny  veers, {hooting  forth  anew  every  Spring. 

Place.  . 

It  groweth  in  moift  Meadows,  that  lie  much 
wet,  ox  neer  the  Courfes  of  W  ater. 

Time.' 

ItjFlowreth  in  fpme  place  or  other  all  the 
three  Summer  Months,  that  is,  June,  Jidy, 
and  .Augujl,  and  their  Seed  is  ripe  quickly  af¬ 
ter. 

Venues  and  vfe. 

.  It  is  ufed  to  ftay  all  manner  of  Bleedingsj 
Fluxes,  Vomitings,  and  Womens  Courles, 
and  alfo  their  Whites ,  It  is  faidto  alter  and 
take  away  the  fits  of  Qtartan  Agues ,  and  to 
make  a  merry  heart,  for  which  purpofe  foine 
ufe  the  Flowers^and  fome  the  Leavs.  It  hel- 
peth  fpeedily  thofe  that  are  troubled  with  the 
'^hollick,  being  boyled  in  Wine  j  and  with  a 
little  Honey  taken  warm,  it  openeth  the  Bel¬ 
ly  :  but  boyled  in  red  Wine  and  drunk  it  ftay  - 
eth  the  Flux  of  the  Belly.  Being  outwardly 
applied,  it  healeth  old  Ulcers  that  are  Can- 
krous  or  eaten,  or  hollow  and  Fiftulous,  for 
which  it  is  by  many  much  commended,  as  al¬ 
fo  for  the  Sores  in  the  Mouth  or  fecret  parts. 

The  Leavs  when  they  are  fullgrown  being 
laid  upon  the  Skin,  will  in  a  fhort  time  raife 
Blifters  thereon,  as  Tragus  faith.  The  wa¬ 
ter  thereof  helpcth  the  heat  and  Inflamation  in 
the  Eyes. 

Venus  claims  dominion  over  the  Herb. 

Tke  Quince-Tree. 

-h 

'  Deferiptim. 

THe  Ordinary  ^ince-tree  groweth  often 
to  the  height  and  bignefs  of  a  rcafonable 
Apple-tree,  but  more  ufually  lower  and  croo¬ 
ked  with  a  rough  Bark,  fpreading  Arms  and 
Branches  far  abroad.  The  LeayS  are  fomwhat 
like  thofe  of  the  Apple-tree,  but  thicker,  har¬ 
der,  and  fuller  of  Veins,  and  white  on  the 
under  fide,  not  dented  at  all  about  the  edges. 
The  Flowers  are  large  and  white,  fomtimes 
dalh’d  over  with  a  Blnlh  :  The  Fruit  that  fol- 
loweth  is  yellovy,  being  neer  ripe,  and  cove¬ 
red  with  a  white  Freez  or  Cotton,  thick  fet  on 
the  yonger,  and  growing  lefs  as  they  grow  to 
be  through  ripej  bunched  out  often  times  in 
fome  places,  fome  being  liker  an  Apple  and  , 


fome  a  Pear,  of  a  ftrong  heady  feent,  and  not 
durable  to  keep,  and  is  fowr,  harfh,  and  of 
an  unpleafant  taft  to  eat  frefh,  but  being  fcal- 
ded,  roafted,' Baked,  or  pr'eferved,  becometh 
more  pleafant. 

'  . .  ■ '  Place  and  Time'. 

Itbeftlikesto  groW.neer  Ponds  andWater- 
fidesj  and  is  frequent  through  this  Land  j  and 
Flowreth  not  until  the  Leavs  be  come  forth. 

The  Fruit  is  ripe  in  September  or  October. 

Venues  and  Vfe. 

^inces  when  they  are  green,  helps  all  forts 
of  Fluxes  in  man  or  Woman,  and  Chollerick 
Lasks,  Callings,  and  whatfoever  needeth  lasl^s, 
ftridion  more  than  any  way  prepared  by  fire  : 

Yet  the  Syrup  of  the  juyee,  or  the  Conferve,  Provol(eth 
are  much  conducible,  much  of  the  binding  jppetite, 
quality  being  confumed  by  the  fire  :  If  a  little 
Vinegar  be  added,  it  ftirreth  up  the  langui-  yomiting, 
filing  Appetite,  and  the  Stomach  given  to  ca-  pointing 
fting  3  Some  Spices  being  added,  it  comfor-  Spirits, 
teth  and  ftrengthneththe  decayed  and  fainting  choUer' 
Spirits,  and  helpeth  the  Liver  opprefled  5  that 
it  cannot  perfed  the  digeftion,  and  corredeth  pgyfyf^^ 
Choller  and  Flegm :  If  you  would  have  them 
Purging,  put  Honey  to  them  inftead  of  Sugarj  sreafis 
and  if  more  Laxative,  for  Choller,  Rubarb  j  plague 
for  Flegm,  Turbith  ,  for  watery  Humors,  Sorer 
Scammony,  but  if  more  forcibly  to  bind,  ufe  Prefervetb 
the  unripe  ^inces  with  Rofes,  and  Acacia,or 
Hypociilis,  and  fome  torrefied  Rubarb.  To 
take  of  the  crude  Juyee  of  Quinces,  is  lield  a 
Prefervative  againft  the  force  of  deadly  poy- 
fon  i  for  it  hath  been  found  moll  certain  true, 
that  the  very  fmel  of  a  ^inct  hath  taken  a- 
wayall'the  ftrength  of  the  Poyfon  of  White 
Hellebore.  If  there  be  heed  of  any  outward 
binding  and  cooling  of  any  hot  Fluxes  5  The 
Oyl  of  ^inces,  or  other  Medicines  that  may 
be  made  thereof  are  very  available  to  anoint 
the  Belly,  or  other  parts  therewith :  It  likewife 
ftrengthcneth  ftie  Stomach  and  Belly,  and  the 
Sinews  that  are  loofned  by  {harp  Humors  fal¬ 
ling  on  them,  and  reftraineth  immoderate 
fweatings.  The  Muccilagc  taken  from  the 
Seeds  of  ^inces  boyled  a  little  in  Water,  i's 
very  good  to  cool  the  Heat  and  heal  the  Sore 
Breafts  of  Women.  The  fame  with  a  little 
Sugar  is  good  to  lenefic  the  harlhnefs  and- 
hoarfnefs  ofthe  Throat,  and  roughnefs  of  the 
Tongue.  The  Cotton  or  Down  of 
boyled  and  applied  to  Plague  Sores ,  healeth 
them  up  j  and  laid  as  a  Play fter  made  up  with 
Wax,  itbringeth  hair  to  them  that  are  bald, 
andkeepethitfrom  falling  if  it  be  ready  to 
{hcd. 


G  g 


Radifh 


10% 


The  EngUp  fhyfitwi. 


t^P  4*  ^  4' 4' • ‘I’ ^  ^  ^  ‘f’ ^  ^  ^  ^4* 

^  ^  ^  ^  «$-» '  <1*  ^ i  V  ^ 

Radifh  and  Hoife- 

Radifii. 

THe  Garden  Tiadijh  is  fo  wcl  known 
that  it  needeth  no  Defcription. 
Vefcriftioti. 

The  H0rf-Radi{h  hath  his  firft 
Leavs  that  rife  before  Winter,  about  a  foot 
and  a  h-alf  long,  very  much  cut  in  or  torn  on 
the  edges  into  many  parts  of  a  dark  green  co¬ 
lour,  with  a  great  Rib  in  the  middle ;  After 
thefe  have  been  up  a  while,  others  follow, 
which  are  greater,  rougher,  broader,  and  lon¬ 
ger  whol,  and  not  devided  as  the  firft,  but  on¬ 
ly  fomwhat  roundly  dented  about  the  edges : 
The  Stalk  when  it  beareth  Flowers  (which  is 
but  fcldom)  is  great  rifing  up  with  fome  few 
leffer  Leavs  thereon  to  three  or  four  foot 
high,  fpreading  at  the  top  many  fmal  Bran¬ 
ches  of  whitifh  Flowers,  made  of  four  Leavs 
apiece  after  which  come  fmal  Pods  like  thofe 
of  Shepheards-Purf,  but  feldom  with  any  Seed 
in  them.  The  Root  is  great,  long,  whitc,and 
rugged  {hooting  up  diverf  Heads  of  Leavs, 
which  may  be  parted  for  cncreaf,  but  it  doth 
not  creep  within  ground  nor  run  above 
ground,  and  is  of  a  ftrong  {harp  and  bitter 
taft,  almoft  like  Muftard. 

VUce. 

It  is  found  wild  in  feme  places  of  this  Land, 
but  is  chiefly  planted  in  Gardens  where  it  joy- 
eth  in  a  moiff  and  {hadowy  place. 

Time- 

It  Flowrcth  but  feldom,  but  when  it  doth,  it 
Is  in  July. 

Vertues  and  Vfe- 


Scurvy) 
WormS) 
SciaUca, 
Liver  3  & 
SpleeU) 


StonC) 

Difury. 


The  juyee  of  Hoyf-Kadifh  given  in  drink  is 
held  to  be  very  eftcaual  for  the  Scurvy.  It 
killeth  the  Worms  in  Children  being  drunk, 
and  alfo  laid  upon  the  Belly.  The  Root  brui- 
fed  and  laid  to  the  place  grieved  with  the  Scia¬ 
tica,  Joynt-ach,  or  the  hard  Swellings  of  the 
Liver  and  Spleen,  doth  wonderfully  help  them 
all.  The  Diftilled  water  of  the  Herb  and 
Roots  is  more  familiar  to  he  taken  with  a  lit¬ 
tle  Sugar  for  all  the  purpofes  aforefaid. 

Garden  Radifhes  are  in  wantonnefs  by  the 
Gentry  eaten  as  Sallet,  but  they  breed  but 
feurvy  Humors  in  the  Stomach,  and  corrupt 
the  Blood,  and  then  fend  for  a  Phyfltian  as  fall 
as  you  can,  this  is  one  caufjmakes  the  owners 
of  fuch  nice  Pallats  fo  unhealthful,  yet  for 
fuch  as  are  troubled  with  the  Gravel,  Stone, or 
ftoppage  of  Urine,  they  are  good  Phyflek  if 
the  Body  be  flrong  that  takes  them,  you  may 
make  the  Juyee  of  the  Roots  into  a  Syrup  if 


youpleaf  for  that  ufe,  they  purge  by  Urine  ex¬ 
ceedingly. 

I  know  not  what  Planet  they  arc  under,.  I 
think  none  of  all  the  Seven  will  own  them. 

Ragwort. 


Defeription. 

THe  greater  common  Ragwort  hath  many 
large  and  long  dark  green  Leavs  lying  on 
the  ground,  very  much  rent  and  torn  on  the 
fides  into  many  pieces,  from  among  which 
rife  up  fomtimes  but  one,  and  fomtimes  two 
or  three  fquare  qr  crefted  blackifli  or  browniih 
Stalks  three  or  four  foot  high,  fomtimes  bran¬ 
ched  bearing  diverfe  fuch  like  Leavs  upon 
them  at  fevcral  diftancesunto  the  tops,  where 
it  brancheth  forth  into  many  Stalks  bearing 
yellow  Flowers,  conlifting  of  diverfe  Leaves 
let  as  a  Pale  or  Border,  with  a  dark  yellow 
thrum  in  the  middle,  which  do  abide  a  great 
while,  but  at  laft  are  turned  into  Down,  and 
with  the  fmal  blackiih  gray  S^ed  are  carried 
away  with  the  wind.  The  Root  is  made  of 
many  Fibres,  whereby  it  is  firmly  faftn^d  into 
to  the  ground ,  and  abideth  many  ycers. ' 

There  is  another  fort  hereof  different  from 
the  former  only  in  this.  That  it  rifeth  not  fo 
nigh ;  the  Leavs  are  not  fo  finely  jagged,  nor 
of  To  dark  a  green  colour,  but  rather  fomwhat 
whitifh,  foft  and  woolly,  and  the  Flowers  u- 
fually  paler. 

Tlace. 

They  grow  both  of  them,  wild  in  Pafturcs, 
and  untiued  grounds  in  many  places,  and  of¬ 
tentimes  both  of  them  in  one  Field. 

Time.  Sore 

They  Flower  in  June  and  July)  and  the  Mouth  ov 
Seed  is  ripe  in  Muguft.  Throat, 

Venues  and  Vfe.  Swellings 

Rapa  art,  Clenfeth,  Digefteth,  and  Difeuf-  and  Irnpo- 
feth.  The  Decoft  ion  of  the  Herb  to  waih  the  flumes. 
Mouth  or  Throat  that  have  Ulcers  or  Sores  ^infie 
therein  j  and  for  Swellings,  hardnefs,  or  Im-  &  Kings 
poftumations,  for  it  throughly  clenfeth  and  Evil, 
healeth  them  j  as  alfo  the  Quinfie  and  the  Catarrhs 
Kings  Evil :  It  helpeth  to  flay  Catarrrhes, 
thin  Rhewms  ScDefluxions  from  the  Head  in-  xions, 
to  the  Eyes,  Nole,  or  Lungs.  The  Juyee  is  Green 
found  by  experience  to  be  Angular  good  to  Wounds  & 
heal  green  Wounds,  and  to  clenfe  and  heal  all  Ulcers  in 
old  and  filthy  Ulcers  in  the  Privities  and  in  the  prc'wy 
other  parts  of  the  Body;  as  alfo  iimdxd  Parts, 
Wounds  and  Ulcers,  and  flayeth  the  Mzllg-  Running 
nity  of  fretting  or  running  Cankers  and  hoi-  Can\crs, 
low  Fiftulaes,  not  fuftering  them  to  fpread  fur-  &  hull ow 
thcr.  It  is  alfo  mirch  commended  to  help  A-  Piftulacs,  • 
ches  and  pains  either  in  the  Flefhy  parts  or  in  Aches  & 
the  Nervs  and  Sinews  ;  as  alfo  the  Sciatica,  or  pains, 
pain  of  the  Hips  or  Huckle-Bone,  to  bath  the  Sciatica. 

places 


Fiflulaesy 

&  hoUe>w 

Ulcers, 

Womens 

Cuurfes, 

Fluxes, 

Cough, 

Di  m  fight 


The  EngUJh  Thyjltiath 


places  with  the  Decoftion  of  the  Herb,  or 
to  anoint  them  with  an  Oyntment  made  of 
the  Herb  bruiled  and  boyled  in  old  Hogs  Suet, 
with  fome  Maftich  and  Olibanum  in  Pouder, 
added  unto  it  after  it  is  ftrained  forth. 

In  Sufi'ex  we  call  it  Ragweed. 


Fyes  draweth  forth  any  5kin,  Dimnefs,  or 
Film  from  the  fight  without  trouble  or  pain. 

Refl:=Harrow,  oj!:Cam- 
moak. 


Rattic-grafs. 

OF  this  there  are  two  kinds,  which  I  lliall 
fpeak  of,  The  Red  and  yellow* 
Vefeription. 

The  common  red  Rattle  fiiith  fiindry  reddifli 
hollow  Stalks,and  fomtimes  green  rifing  from 
thcRootjlying  for  the  moft  part  on  the  ground, 
yet  fome  growing  more  upright,  with  many 
Ifnal  reddifh  or  greenilh  Lcavs  fet  on  both 
fidcs  of  a  middle  Rib  finely  dented  about  the 
edges  t  The  Flowers  Hand  at  the  tops  of  the 
Stalks  and  Branches,  of  a  fine  purplifh  red  co¬ 
lour  ,  like  final  gaping  hoods,  after  which 
come  flat  blackifh  Seed  in  finall  Husks,  which 
lying  loof therein,  will  Rattle  with  lhaking. 
The  Root  confifts  of  two  or  three  fmall  whi- 
tifh  firings,  with  fome  fibres  thereat. 

The  common  Yellow  ‘Rj.ttle  hath  feldom  a- 
bove  one  round  green  St^k  rifing  from  the 
Root,  about  half  a  yard  or  two  foot  high,  and 
but  few  Branches  thcron  having  two  long  and 
fomwhat  broad  Lcavs  fet  at  a  Joynt,  deeply 
cut  in  on  the  edges,  refembliug  the  Comb  of 
e  Cock,  broadett  next  to  the  Stalk  and  fraaller 
to  the  end  ;  The  Flowers  grow  at  the  tops  of 
the  Stalks  with  fome  fhorter  Leavs  with  them, 
hooded  after  the  fame  manner  that  the  others 
are,  but  of  a  fair  yellow  colour  in  moll,  or  in 
fome  paler,  and  in  fome  more  white*  The 
Seed  is  contained  in  Urge  Husks,  and  being 
ripe  will  rattle  or  make  a  noif  with  lying  loole 
in  them.  The  Root  is  fmall  and  {lender  pe- 
rifliing  every  yeer. 

'Place. 

They  grow  in  our  Meadows  and  Woods,  ge¬ 
nerally  through  this  Land.  '' 

Tme. 

They  are  in  Flower  from  Midfummer  until  i 
.Augufl  be  paft  fomtimes. 

yertues  and  ufe 

The  Red  'Rattle  is  accounted  profitable  to 
heal  up  Fiftulaes,  and  hollow  Ulcers  and  to 
flay  the  Flux  of  Humors  to  them,  as  alfo  the 
abundance  of  Womens  Courfes,  or  any  other 
Flux  of  Blood,  being  boyled  in  red  Wine  and 
drunk. 

The  Yellow  Rattle  or  Cocks  Comb  is  held 
to  B:  good  for  thofe  that  are  troubled  with  a 
Cough,  or  with  Dimnefs  of  Sight,  if  the 
.  Herb  being  boyled  with  Beans,  and  fome  Ho¬ 
ney  put  thereto,  be  drunk,  or  dropped  into  the 
Eyes.  The  whol  Seed  being  put  into  the 


Vefeription. 

THe  common  Re(i-H arrow  rifeth  up  with 
diverf  rough  woody  twigs,  half  a  yard, 
or  a  yard  hi^,  fet  at  the  Joynts  with¬ 
out  ordcr,with  little  roundilh  Leavs  fomtimes 
more  than  two  or  three  at  a  place,  of  a  dark 
gieen  colour,  without  thorns  while  they  are 
yong,  but  afterwa;  ds  armed  in  fundry  places 
with  fhort  and  fliirp  Thorns.  The  Flowers 
come  forth  at  the  tops  of  the  twigs  and  Bran¬ 
ches  whereof  it  is  ful,  fafhioned  Tike  Peaf,  or 
Broom  Bloflbms,  but  Idler,  flatter,  and  fom-, 
what  clofer,  of  a  faint  purplifti  colout  j  after 
which  come  final  Pods,  containing  fmsd,  flat, 
and  round  Seed  :  The  Root  is  blackifh  on  the 
outfide  and  whitifh  within,  very  tough  and 
hard  to  break  when  it  is  frefli  and  green,  and 
as  l^ard  as  an  Horn  when  it  is  dried,  thrufting 
down  deep  into  the  ground,and  Ipreading  like- 
wife,  every  piece  being  apt  to  grow  again  if  is 
be  left  in  the  ground. 

Place.  \ 

Ir  groweth  in  many  places  of  this  Land,  as 
well  in  the  Arable  as  waft  ground. 

Time. 

.  It  Flowreth  about  the  beginning  or  middle 
of  July,  and  the  Seed  is  ripe  in  .Augu  ji. 

Venues  and  ufe. 

It  is  fingular  good  to  provoke  Urine  when  Vrlm 
it  is  flopped,  and  to  break  and  drive  forth  the  fiopped. 
Stone,  which  the  Pouder  of  the  Bark  of  the  Stowe, 
Root  taken  in  Wine  performeth  efFeftuaUy. 
iP^iathiolm  faith,  the  fame  hclpeth  the  Difeaf 
called  Miernia  Carnofa,  rhe  Flcfhy  Rupture  by  plgPjy 
taking  the  (aid  Pouder  for  fome  Months  togc-  Rp/p/m ' 
ther  conftantly,  and  that  it  hath  cured  fome  ^  ^ 

which  Teemed  incurable  by  any  other  means 
than  by  cutting  or  burning*  The  Decoiftion 
thereof  made  with  fome  Vinegar  and  gargled 
in  the  Mouth,  cafeth  the  Toothach,  efoeciily  Toothach, 
when  it  comes  of  Rhewm  5  and  the  laid  De- 
codion  is  very  powerful  to  open  Obftrudi- 
ons  of  the  Liver  and  Spleen^  and  other  parts.  Liver 
A  DiftilledWater  made  in  Balneo  Maria  with  Spleen. 
four  pound  of  the  Roots  hereof  firft  fliced  ObJfuCied 
final,  and  afterwards  fteeped  in  a  Gallon  of 
Canary  Wine,  is  fingular  good  for  all  the  pur- 
pofes  af^efaid  and  to  clenfthe  paiTages  of  the 
Urine.  The  Pouder  oTthe  faid  Root  made  in¬ 
to  an  Eleduary  or  Lo2,engcs  with  Sugar  ;  as 
alfo  the  Bark  of  the  frefh  Roots  boyled  tender 
and  afterwards  beaten  into  a  Conferve  with 
Sugar,  workeththc  like  effed*  The  Pouder  of 
G  g  z  the 


204 


The  EngUJh  ^hyfitian. 


Z>lars.  the  Roots  ftrewed  upon  the  Brims  nf 

or  mixed  with  any  other  convenient  thing 

Tnd  applied  cpnfumeth  the  hardnefs  and  cau- 

feth  them’to  heal  the  better. 


Jncreafeth 

Sperms- 

Venery, 

Helps  Di- 

feftiOTii 

Frovolies 

Z>rm, 

Biting  of 

'Serpents 

^c. 

Cough  in 

Children, 

Increafetb 

Milk, 

Clenfeth 
the  Face, 
Scars, 

Blue  (pots, 
M arils  of 
fmd  Fox. 


Rocket.  ' 

IN  regard  the  garden  is  ratte  ufed 

as'aSallet  Herb  than  to  any  Bhyfical  pur- 
Dofes,  1  Bull  omit  it,  and  only  of  the 

ccmmcn  wild  '  T{ocket  :  The  Defcription 
whereof  take  as  followethi 

Defcription^ 

^  The  common  wild  Rocket,  hath  longer  and 
narrower  Leavs  much  more  devided  into  Ben¬ 
der  cuts  and  jags  on  both  fides  of  the  middle 
Rib.thanthe  Garden  kinds  have,  of  a  fad  o- 
verworn  green  colour,  from  among  which  n- 
feth  UP  divert  ftiff  Stalks  two  or  three  foot 
high,  fomtimes  fet  with  the  like  Leavs  but 

fmalier,  and  fmaller  upwards,  branched  from 

the  middle  into  diverf  Biff  Stalks  ,  bearing 
fundry  yellow  Blowers  on  them  made  of  four 
Xeavs  apiece,  as  the  others  are, ,  which  at- 

P™  of  a  more  bitter  and  bot  b.ung  raft 
thanie  Garden  binds,  as  the  Leavs  are  al- 

fo. 

TUce. 

It  is  found  wild  in  diverf  places  of  this 

Land.  .  M ' 

Time.  ; , 

It  rlowreth  about  June  and  July 3  and  the 

Seed  is  ripe  in  Augiifi- 

VcrtHcs  and  Tije.  , 

The  Wild  Rocket  is  more  ftrong  and  efte- 
ftual  to  encreaf  Sperm  and  Veneteous  jali- 
ties,  whereunto  alio  the  Seed  is  more  efteftu- 
althan  the  Garden  kinds:  It  ferveth  alio  to 
help  Digeflicn  and  provoketh  Urine  excee¬ 
dingly.  The  Seed  is  ufed  to  cure  theTmngs 
of  Seipents,  the  Scorpion,  and  the  Shi^w- 
Moufe,  and  other  Poyfons  ,  and 
Worms  and  other  noilom  Creatures  that  breed 
in  the  Body.  The  Herb  boyled  or  Bewed,  and 
fomc  Sugar  put  thereto,  helpeth  the  Cough  m 
Children  being  taken  often.  The  Seed  alfo 
taken  in  drink  taketh  rway  the  ill  feent  of  t  e 
Armpits,  encreafeth  Milk  inNurfes,  an  wa 
Beth  the  Spleen.  The  Seed  mixed  with  Ho¬ 
ney,  and  ufed  on  the  face,  clenfeth  the  Skin 
from  Spots,  Mo)  phew  and  other  difcolourmgs 
therein  t  and  ufed  with  Vinegar  taketh  away 
Freckles  and  rednefs  in  theFace  or  other  parts, 
and  with  the  Gall  of  an  Ox,  it  amendeth  foul 
Scars,  black  and  blew  Spots,  and  the  marks  of 

The  Wild  Rockets  are  forbidden  to  be  ufed 
alone  in  regard  their  flurpnefs  .iumeth  into 


1  the  Head,  caiifing  ach  and  pain  therein  :  and 
are  no  lefs  hurtful  to  hot  and  Chollcrick  per- 
1  fons,  for  fear  of  inflaming  their  Blood,  and 
therfore  for  fuch  we  may  fay,  a  little  doth  but 
a  little  harm.  For  angry  ^ars  rules  them,and 
he  fomtimes  will  be  teBy  when  he  meets  with 
Fools. 

Winter  Rocket^  or 
Creffes. 


’Defcription. 

\7\  Rocket,  or  winter  Creffes', 

Y  hatli  diverfe  fomwhat  large  fad 

green  Leavs  lying  upon  the  ground,  torn  or 
cut  into  divcrfparts,  fomwhat  like  unto  Roc¬ 
ket,  or  Turnep  Leavs  with  fmaller  pieces  next 
the  bottom,  and  broad  at  the  ends  which  fo  a- 
bidc  all  Winter  (if  it  fpringup  in  JLutunm, 
when  it  is  ufed  to  be  eaten )  from  among  which 
rifeth  up  diverf  fmal  round  Stalks  full  of  bran¬ 
ches,  bearing  many  fmal  yellow  Flowers  of 
four  Leavs  apiece,  after  which  come  fmal  long 
Pods  with  reddifti  Seed  in  them:  The  Root 
is  fomwhat  Bringy,  andperifheth  every  ycer 
after  the  Seed  is  ripe. 

Vlace. 

Itcrroweth  of  its  own  accord  in  Gardens 
and  Fields  by  the  way  Bdes  in  diverfe  places, 
and  particularly  in  the  next  Pafiure  to  the 
Conduit-Head  behind  Graycs-lnne  that 
brings  Water  to  IVlr.  Lamb  s  Conduit  in  Hoi— 
bourn. 

Time. 

It  Flowreth  in  May,  and  Scedeth  in  June, 

and  then  perifbeth. 

Venues  and  Vfe. 

This  is  profitable  to  provoke  Urine,  ^eidStyangury, 
helpeth  the  Strangury,  and  to  expel  Gravelg^^-^g/  ^ 
and  the  Stone  j  It  is  alfo  of  good  eflea  snthestone, 
Scurvey  :  It  is  found  by  experience  to  be  a  nn-ccmzy, 
gular  «^ood  Wound  Herb,  to  clenfc  inwardf^/j,^^^y^ 
Wounds,the  juyee  or  Decoftion  being  ^ 

or  outwardly  applied  to  wafli  foul  Ulcers  and5pj.pj. 
Sores,  clenfing  them  by  fharpnefs,  and  hin- 
arine  or  abating  the  dead  Flefh  front  growing 
therein,  and  healing  them  by  the  drying  quali¬ 
ty- 

Rofes. 

T  Hold  it  altogether  nccdlefsto  trouble  the 
1  Reader  with  a  Defcription  of  any  of  thelc, 
fith  both  the  Garden  Rof  s,  and  the  Wild  Ro¬ 
fes  of  the  Bryars  are  well  enough  known ; 

1 'Take 'theretcre  the  Vertuts  otihcmas  folio- 


The  Englijh  Thyfitian, 


20J 


weth  :  And  firft  I  flial  begin  with  the  Garden 
binds. 

Venues  and  Ufe. 

The  White  and  the  Red  Ro/es'  are  cooling 
and  drying,  yet  the  White  is  taken  to  exceed 
the  Red  in  both  thofe  properties, but  is  feldom 
ufed  inwardly  in  any  Medicine.  The  biiter- 
nefs  in  the  Rofes  when  they  are  frefh,  efpecial- 
ChoUeT,  &  lythejuyee  purgeth  Choller,  and  watery  Hu- 
Watcrilh  mors,  but  being  dried  and  that  heat  which 
Humors,  caufed  the  bitternefs  being  confumed,  t^cy 
Headachj  have  then  a  binding  and  aftringent  quality  i 
Vains  in  Thofe  alfo  that  are  not  ful  blown  do  both  cool 
ihe  Ears,  and  bin'd  more  than  thofe  that  are  full  blown, 

Eyes,  and  the  White  Rofes  more  titan  the  Red.  The 

E  hr  oat  &  Decodion  of  Red  Rofes  made  with  Wine  and 
Gums,  ufed,  is  very  good  for  the  Headach,  and  pains 
Eunda-  in  the  Eyes,  Ears,  Throat,  and  Gums,  as  alfo 
ment,  Bo-  for  the  Eundament,  the  lower  Bowels,  and 
rods,  &  the  Matrix,  being  bathed,  or  put  into  thern.. 
CMatrix-  The  fame  Decoftion  with  the  Rofes  remai- 
S/:  Antho-  ninginit  is  profitably  applyed  to  the  Regi- 
nies  fire,  on  of  the  Heart  to  eaf  the  laflamation  therin  5 
f  omach,  as  alfo  St.  Anthonies  fire,  and  other  Difeafes 
Womens  of  the  Stomach.  Being  dried  and  beaten  to 

Courfes,  Rouder,  and  taken  in  ttceled  Wine  or  Water, 
Defluxi-  it  helpeth  to  ftay  W omens  Courfes.  The  yel- 
OHSy  low  threds  in  the  middle  of  the  red  Rofes  (w'’  ^ 

faftneth  are  erroniouily  called  the  Rofe  Seeds)  being 
Teeth,  pondered  and  drunk  in  the  diftilled  water  of 
task  &  Quinces,  ftayeth  the  overflowing  of  Womens 
fpitting  0/ Courfes,  and  doth  wonderfully  Bay  the  Dcfla- 
Blood,  xions  of  Rhewm  won  the  Gums  and  Teeth, 
Heat  &  preferving  them  from  corruption,  and  faft- 
Infiamati-  ning  them  if  they  be  loofe,  being  wafhedand 
ons,  gargled  therewith,  and  feme  V inegar  of  Squil s 

Re(l&  added  thereto.  The  Heads  with  Seed  being  u- 
(leep,  fed  in  Ponder  or  inaDecoaion,  ftayeth  the 
whites  d?'  Lask,  and  fpitting  of  Blood.  Red  Rofes  do 
Reds  in  ftrengthen  the  Heart,the  Stomack,and  the  Li- 

women,  ver,  and  the  retentive  Faculties,  they  mitigate 
ChoUer  &  the  pains  that  arife  from  Heat,  affwage  Infla- 
Tlegm,  mations,  procure  reft  and  fleep,  ftay  both 
Rednefi&  Whites  and  Reds  in  Women,  the  Gonorrhea, 
roatering  running  of  the  Reins,  and  the  Fluxes  of  the 
of  the  Belly  i  The  juyee  of  them  doth  purge  and 

l^yes,  clenfthe  Body  from  Choller  and  Flegm  :  The 
Husks  of  the  Rofes  with  the  Beards  and  Nails 
of  the  Rofes  are  binding  and  cooling,  and  the 
Diftilled  Water  ofeither  of  them  is  good  for 
the  Heat  and  rednefs  in  the  Eyes,  and  to  ftay 
and  dry  up  the  Rhewms  and  watering  of  them. 
Of  the  Red  Rofes  are  ufually  made  many 
Compofuions  all  ferving  to  fundry  good  ufes; 
Vi\.  Eleftuary  of  Rofes ',  Conferve  both 
moift  and  dry,  which  is  more  ufually  called  Su¬ 
gar  of  Rofes  J  Syrup  of  dryed  Rofes,  and  Ho¬ 
ney  ofRofes  j  The  Cordial  Ponder  called 
'DiarhodoH  ^Abhatis',  and  ^Aromatica  Rofa- 
rum ',  The  Diftilled  Water  of  Rofes,  Vine¬ 
gar  of  Rofes,  Oyntment  and  Oyl  of  Rofes, 
and  the  Rofe  Leavs  dried,  which  although  no 
Compofition,  yet  of  very  great  ufs  and  effetl. 


'  To  write  at  large  of  every  orte  of  thefe  would 
make  my  Book  fwel  too  big,  it  being  fuffici- 
entfora  Volom  by  it  fclf  to  {peak  fully  of 
them  :  But  briefly  j  The  Eleauary  is  pur¬ 
ging,  whereof  two  or  three  Drams  taken  by 
it  felf  in  fome  convenient  Liquor  is  a  Purge 
fufficient  for  a  weak  Conftitution  >  but  may 
be  encreafed  to  fix  drams  according  to  the 
ftrength  ofthe  Patient.  It  purgeth  ChoWtv  a  Purge 
without  trouble,  and  is  good  in  hot  Feavers,  for  Chol- 
and  pains  of  the  Head  arifing  from  hot  Choi-  ler, 
lerick  Humors ,  and  heat  in  the  Eyes,  the  Hot  Fea- 
Jaandice  alfo,  and  Joynt  Aches  proceeding  of  vers, 
hot  Humors.  The  moift  Conferve  is  of  much  Pains-.of 
ufe,  both  binding  and  Cordial,  for  until  it  be  the  Head, 
about  two  years  old  it  is  more  hindias  thm  He  at  of 
Cardial,  and  after  that,  more  Cordial  than  the  Eyes, 
Binding  :  Some  of  the  yonger  Conferve  taken  Jaundice, 
with  dMetlrridatum  mixed  together,  is  good  Joynt 
for  thofe  that  are  troubled  with  Diftillations  Aches, 
of  Rhewm  fromthe  Brain  to  the  Nofe,  and  viftiUati’- 
Defluxions  of  Rhewm  into  the  Eyes,  as  gns,  & 
for  Fluxes,  end  Lasks  of  the  Belly  s  and  being  Befiuxi- 
mixed  with  the  Pouder  of  Maftick  is  very  ons  of 
good  for  the  Running  of  the  Reins,  and  for  o-  Rherom, 
ther  loofnefs  of  Humors  in  the  Body.  The  old  Fluxes,  & 
Conferve  mixed  mxh.^Aromaticum  Rofarum  Lasiis, 
is  a  very  good  Cordial  againft  Paintings,  running  of 
Swounings,Weaknefs,  and  Tremblings  ofthe  the  Reins, 
Heart,  ftrengthning  both  it,  and  a  weak  Sto-  Faintings, 
mach,  helpeth  digeftion,  ftayeth  calling,  vsxd  Jvaounings 
is  a  Very  good  Prefervative  in  the  time  of  In-  eb*  trem- 
fedion.  The  dry  Conferve  which  is  called  bling  of 
Sugar  of  Rofes,  is  a  very  good  Cordial  to  the  Heart, 
ftrenthen  the  Heart  and  Spiritsj  as  alfo  to  ftay  Helpeth 
Defluxions.  The  Syrup  of  dried  Red  Rofes 
ftrengthneth  a  Stomack  given  to  cafting,  coo-  Stayeth 
leth  an  overheated  Liver  and  the  Blood  in  cafting, 
Agues,  comforreth  the  Heart  and  refifteth  pu-  infedion, ' 
trefaftioD  and  infeftion,  and  helpeth  to  ftay  Cooleth 
Lasks  and  Fluxes.  Honey  ofRofes  is  much  the  Liver 
ufed  in  Gargles  and  Lotions  to  waih  Sores  ei-  Blood, 
ther  in  the  Mouth,  Throat,  or  other  pa"ts,  reffteth 
both  to  clenf  and  heal  them,  and  to  ftay  tiie  Futrefa- 
Fluxes  of  Humors  falling  upon  them  i  it  is  dion,  & 
alfo  ufed  in  Clifters  both  to  cool  and  clenf.  infedion. 
The  Cordial  Pouders  csi.hd'Diarhadon  Abba-  jl-  g 
tis  and  Aromaticum  Rofarum  do  comfort- and  Mouths, 
ftrengthen  the  Heart  and  Stomach,  procure  Tn.jxis, 
an  Appetite,  help  Digeftion,  ftayeth  Vomi-^-i-. 
ting  j  and  is  very  good  for  chofe  that  have  flip-  co  ■ 
pery  Bowels  to  ftrengthen  them,  anci  to  dry  up  f-r  • 
their  moiftura.  Red  Rofe  Water  is  of  , 

known  and  familiar  ufe  in  all  occafions  (and  Vo,  -.- 
better  than  Damask  Rofe  Water)  being  coo- t’ng^, 
ling  and  Cordial,  refreftiing  and  quickning  Fa  nt 
the  weak  and  faint  Spirits,  ufed  either  in  meats  spirits, 
or  broths,  to  walh  the  Temples,  ortolrucl  xo  T^cdncft 
at  the  Nofe,  or  to  fmel  the  fweet  vapors  ther-  Eyes, 
of  out  of  a  perfuming  Pot  or  caft  on  a  hoc 
Fire-ihovel:  It  is  alio  of  much  good  uie  a- 
gainft  the  rednefs  and  Inflamations  in  the  eyes 
to  bath  them  therwith,  and  vhc  Temples  of 
M  m  the 


20  6 


The  Englijh  ^hyjltian. 


Tiocurc 

(Icep, 


Heat  of 
the  Live/, 
Racl(_  & 
"Rebts, 
Tujbes, 
IVkieals  & 
Tmples, 

T  luxes  of 
Humors, 


Weak  ^0- 
ntach. 


Turie 

ChoUer, 

"Bind  the 
Belly, 


Melan- 

ehoUick, 

Humors, 

Lepry,ltch 

7'etters, 

'French 

Fox, 


Opens  the 
Belly, 


ti^e  Head  alfo  agtanft  pain  and  ach.  for  which 
puipcfe  aifoVinegar  of  Rofes.is  of  much  good 
life,  and  to  pioctue  refV  rand,  fix cp^  if  feme 
thereof  and  Rofe water  together  be  iifed  to 
fmelunto,  or  the  Nefe  and  .Temples  moi- 
ffned  therewith,  but  more  ufually  to  moiffen 
apiece  of  Red  Rofe  Cabe  cut.  fit  for  the  pur- 
pofe,  and  heated  between  a  double  folded 
ClothjW’itb  a  little  beaten  Nutmeg  and  Pop¬ 
py  Seed  ftrewed  on  the  fide  that  mull  lie  next 
to  the  Porebcad  &Tempksj&;  fo  bound  therto 
for  al  night-  The  Oymmentof  Rofes  is  much 
ufed  again!!  heat  &  Inflamations  in  the  Head, 
to  anoint  the  forhead  &temples,&  being  mix¬ 
ed  with  Vmuentum  Fopulconyw  procure  ref!  j 
as  alfo  it  is  ufed  for  the  heat  cf  the  Liver,  of 
the  Bach  and  Reins,  and  to  cool  and  heal  Pu- 
!hes,  Wheals  and  other  red  Pimples  rifing.  in 
the  Face  or  other  parts.  Oyl  of  Rofes  is  not 
only  ufed  by  it  felf  to  code  any  hot  Swellings 
or  Infiamations,  and  to  bind  and  flay  Fluxes 
of  Humors  unto  Sores,  but  is  alfo  put  into 
Oyntments  and  Plaiftcrsthat  are  cooling  and 
binding,  and  reftraining  the  Flux  of  Humors. 
The  dried  Lcavs  of  the  Red  Rofes  are  ufed 
both  inward  and  outwardly,  both  cooling, 
binding,  and  Cordial,  for  with  them  are  made 
both  Aromaticum  T^farum,  T>iarhodon  Ab~ 
batU,  Sini  Saccharum  T^pfarum,  each  ofwhofe 
Properties  are  before  declared.  Rofe  Leavs 
and  Mints  heated  and  applied  outwardly  to  the 
Stomach,  ftaycth  callings,  and  very  much 
ftrengthneth  a  weak  Stomach  j  and  applyed  as 
a  Fomentation  to  the  Region  of  thelliver  and 
Heart,  doth  much  cool  and  temper  them,  and 

alfo  fervethinfteadofaRofeCake  (asisfaid 

before)  to  quiet  the  over  hot  fpirits  and  caufe 
reft  and  bleep.  The  Syrup  of  Damask  Rofes 
is  both  Simple  and  Compound ,  and  made 
withAgrick.  The  Simple  Solutive  Syrup,  is 
a  familiar,  fafe,  gentle,  and  eafie  Medicine, 
purging  ChoUer,  taken  from  one  ounce  to 
three  dr  four  j  yet  this  is  remarkable  herein. 
That  the  diftilled  Water  of  this  Syrup  (hould 
notably  bind  the  Belly  j  The  Syrup  with  A- 
grick  is  more  ftrong  and  effeftual,  for  one 
ounce  thereof  by  it  felf  will  open  the  Body 
more  than  the  other,  and  worketh  as  much  on 
Flegm  as  ChoUer.  The  Compound  Syrup  is 
more  forcible  in  working  on  Melanchollick 
Humors,and  available  again!!  the  ]Lepry,Itch, 
T  etters,  &c.  and  the  French  Difea! '  Alfo 
Honey  of  Rofes  Solutive  is  made  of  the  fame 
infiifion  that  the  Syrup  is  made  of,  and  there¬ 
fore  worketh  the  fame  effed  both  in  opening 
and  purging,  but  is  oftener  given  to  Flegma- 
tick  than  Chollcrick  perfons,  and  is  more  ufed 
in  Clyfters  than  in  PotionSjas  the  Syrup  made 
with  Sugar  is.  The  Conferve  and  Preferved 
Leavs  of  thefe  Rofes  are  alfo  operative,  in 
gently  opening  the  Belly.  The  Simple  Water 
of  the  Damask  Rofes  is  chiefly  ufed  for  fum.es 
to  fweeten  things,  as  the  dried  LejYs  thereof 


to  make  fweet  PouderSj  and  fill  fweet  Bags, 
and  little  life  they  are  put  to  in  Phyfick,  m- 
though  they  have  feme  purging  quality ,  The 
wild  Rofes  alfo  are  few  or  none  of  them  ufed 
in  Phyfick,  but  yet  are  generally  held  to  come 
neer  the  Nature  o!  the  Manured  Rofes.  The  ^r/jd  the 
Fruit  of  the  wild  Eryar  which  are  called  Heps  Belly,  e&“ 
being  throughly  ripe  and  made  into  a  Con-  p^y  jyejlu- 
ferve  with  Sugar  befides  the  pleafantnefs  of^j^^^^ 
the  taft  dcrth  gently  bind  the  Belly,  and  ftay 
IJpfluxions  from  the  Head  upon  the  Stomach, 
drying  up  the  molfture  thereof,  and  helpcth 
digeftion.  The  Pulp  of  the  Heps  dried  unto  a 
hard  cqnfiftence,  like  to  the  juyee  of  Liquq-  wbites’in 
ris,  or  fo  dried  that  it  may  hematic  into  Pou- 
der  and  taken  in  drink  ftayeth  fpeedily  the  stone. 
Whites  in  Women.  The  Bryar  Ball  is  often  provoke  1 
ufed  being  made  into  Pouder  and  drunk  to  V/inc,  j 
break  the  Stone,  to  provoke  Urine  whenitis 
flopped,  and  to  eaf  and  help  the  Chollickj 
feme  appoint  it  to  be  burnt,  and  then  taken 
for  the  fame  purpofe.  In  the  middle  of  thefe 
Balls  arc  often  found  certain  white  Worms, 
which  being  dried  and  made  into  Peuder,  and 
feme  of  it  drunk,  is  found  by  experience  of 
many  to  kill  and  drie  forth  the  Worms  of  the 
Belly. 

What  a  quarter  have  Authors  made  with 
Rofes,.  what  a  racket  have  the>(  kept  ?  I  !hall 
ad.  Red  Rofes  arc  under  f  upitev ,  Damask 
under  Venus ,  and.  White  under  the  Moon, 
and  Province  under  the  King  of  France- 

RofaSolis^  or  Sun-dew« 

Vefeription- 

THis  hath  diverfe  final  round  hollow 
Leavs,  fomwhat  greenilh ,  but  lull  of 
certain  red  hairs,  which  makes  them 
feem  t«d,  every  one  ftanding  upon  its  own 
Footftalk,  reddilh  hairy  likewife.  Tfie  Leavs 
are  continualty  moift  in  the  hotteft  day,  yea 
the  hotter  the  Sun  Ihincs  on  them  the  moifter 
they  are,  with  a  certain  fliminefs  that  will  rope 
(as  we  fay)the  final  hairs  alwaics  holding  this 
moifture  :  Among  thefis  Leavs  rife  up  fmall 
flender  ftalks,  reddefh  alfo,  three  or  four  fin¬ 
gers  high,  bearing  diverfe  final  white  Knobs 
one  above  another  which  are  the  Flowers,  af¬ 
ter  which  in  the  Heads  are  certain  final  Seeds, 
the  Root  is  a  few  fmall  hairs. 

Flace- 

Itgroweth  ufually  onBogs,  and  in  wet  pla¬ 
ces,  and  fomtimes  in  moift  W oods. 

Time. 

It  Flowreth  in  June,  and  then  the  Leavs 
are  fitteft  to  be  gathered. 

Vertues  and  life. 

Rofa  Solis  is  accounted  good  to  help  thofe  Diftillati-' 
that  have  fait  Rhewm  diftilling  on  theirLungs  ons  of 
which  bre«deth  a  Confumption,  and  iherfore 


rf-ist,. 


The  En^liJ}?  Thyfitian. 


207 


itie  DiftiUcd  water  thereof  in  Wine  is  held  fit 
and  profitable  for  fuch  to  drink,  v/hich  Water 
will  be  of  a  gold  yellow  colom* :  The  fame 
Water  is  held  to  be  good  for  all  other  Difeafes 
Vhuficky  6f  the  Lungs,  asPhtificks,  WIteefiug,  fhort- 
n  hccfiftgs:  nefsot  Breath,  or  the  Cough  j  as'alfo  to  heal 
jhortnefi  the  Ulcers  that  happen  in  the  Lungs,  and  it 
flfbrcaihi  comfoncth  the  Heart  and  fainting  Spirits  j 
Cough)  The  Leavs  outwardly  applied  to  the  Skin  will 
Vlccrs  in  vaife  Blifters,  which  hath  caufed  fomc  to  think 
the  lutings )  it,  dangerous  to  be  taken  inward  j  but  there 
CQrnfan  arc  other  things  which  will  alfo  draw_  Blifters, 
the  He.rrr,yet  nothing  dangerous  fo  be  taken  inwardly. 
Kaife  There  is  an  ufual  Drink  made  hereof  with 
fiers.  qt(.(ivk<eznd  Spices  frequently,  and  without 
Faffions  of  any  offence  or  danger,  but  to  good  purpofc  u- 
tbe  Hearts  led  in  qualm*  and  paffions  of  the  Heart. 

The  Sim  rules  it,  and  ’tis  under  the  Sign 
Cancel', 


Rofemary. 


O' 


Cold  Vlf- 

eafeS) 

fChewni: 


UtGaximRofemary  isfo  wcH  known 
that  I  need  not  here  deferibe  it. 

Tim. 

It  Llowreth  in  4pril  and  May  with  nS)  and 
fomtiraeS  again  in  Augu^, 

V cTtues  and  Vfe. 

It  is  an  Herb  of  as  great  ufe  with  as  in  thefe 
dales,  as  any  whatfoever,  not  only  for  Phy-- 
fical  but  Civil  purpofes.  The  Phyfical  ule  ^ 
it  (being  ttiy  jrefent  Task)  isw^ry  rouch,bo* 
Tor  Inward  and  outward  Difeafes For  by  the 
warming  and  comforting  heat  thereof  it  hel- 
peth  all  cold  Difeafes,  both  of  the  Head,  Sto¬ 
mach,  Liver,  and  Belly.  The  Decoaion 
^0.1.111)  thereof  in  Wine  helpeth  the  cold  Diftillations 
fvimmm  of^ewm  into  the  Eyes,  and  aft  cold 

\fthe  “  Bifeafes  of  the  Head  and  Brain,  as  the  Vid- 
V-cad  dinefs  or  fwimming  therein,  DrowfinHs,  or 
■nr  ova  line  a  Dulncfs  of  the  mind  and  fenfes,  like  a  ftupid- 
nefs,  orlofsof  fpceeb,  tte 

Lethargy,  and  Ealling-ficknefs,  to  he  both 
fey  drunk  andthe  Temples  bathed  therewith,  ir 

Lethargy  helpeth  the  pains  in  the  Gums  and  T ceth,  ^  by 
Falling-  B-hewm  falling  into  them,  or  by  putrefaftion 
(ickneR  caufmg  an  eviffmel  from  them,  or  a  ftmking 
Tooth/ch)  Breath.  It  helpeth  a  weak  Memory,  ^d 
ftinkitiz  quickneththeSenfes.  It  is  very  comfortable 
breath)  to  the  Stomach  in  all  the  cold  Griefs  thereof, 
weak  helping  both  retention  of  meat,  and  digeftion, 

the  Dccodtion  or  Pouder  being  taken  in 
Wine  :  It  is  a  Retriedy  for  the  windinefs  in 
the  Stomach  or  Bowels,  andexpellerh  it  po- 
of  Meat)  werfully,  as  alfo  Wind  in  the  Spleen.  Ithcl- 
ivind)  peth  thofc  that  are  Livergrown,  bv  opening 
Liver-  the  Obftruaions  thereof.  It  helpeth  dim 
growU)  Lyes,  and  procureth  a  deer  fight,  the  Plovwrs 
%im  fght)  thereof  being  taken  all  the  while  it  is  Plow- 
ring,  every  morning  faftiog  with  bread  and 


Salr.  Both 'Iiiofcorides  and  G^i/ewfay,  Thar 
if  a  De<X)dion  be  made  thereof  witli  Water 
and  they  that  have  the  yellow  Jaundice  do  ex-  TeUova 
ercife  their  Bodies  prcfently  after  the  taking 
thereof,  it  will  certainly  cure  it :  The  Flowers 
and  the  Conferve  made  of  them,  is  lingular 
good  to  comfort  the  Heart,  and  to  expel  the 
contagion  of  the  Peftilence  j  to  burn  the  Herb  P^Jklcnce) 
in  Houfes  and  Chambers  correfteth  the  Air  in 
them  :  Both  the  Flowers  and  the  Leavs  are 
very  profitable  for  Women  that  are  troubled 
with  the  Whites,  if  they  be  daily  taken.  The 
dried  Leavs  flared  final  and  taken  ip  a  Pipe  like  coi/g-l?  ^ 
as  Tobacco  is  taken,  helpeth  thofethac  have  ]?hitfcl()0r 
any  Cough  or  Pbtifick,  or  Confumbtion,  by  cgnfump- 
warming  and  drying  the  thin  Diftillations  ^ 

which  cauf  thofe  Difeafes.  The  Leavs  are 
much  ufed  in  Bathings,  and  made  into  Oynt- 
ments  or  Qyls,  is  fingular  good  to  help  cold 
benummed  Joynts,  Sinews, or  Members.  The  benummed 
Chimical  Oyl  drawn  from  the  Leavs  and  Flo-  JoyntS) 
vfers,  is  a  Soveraign  help  for  all  the  Difeafes 
aforefaid  j  to  touch  the  Temples  and  Noftrils 
with  two  or  three  drops,  for  all  the  Difeafes  of 
the  Head  and  Brains  ^oken  of  before  ;*  as  d- 
ft)  to  tdke  a  drop  tWo  or  three  as  the.  cauf  requi- 
rcth  for  the  inward  griefs,  yet  muft  it  be  done 
with  Deferetion,.  for  it  is  very  quick  and picr-^ 
cing,  and  therefore  but  a  very  little  muft.be  ta^- 
itcn  ax  a  time.  There  is  alfo  another  Oyl 
made  by  infolation  in  this  manner  r  Take 
what  quantity  you  will  of  the  Fltjwers,  and 
putthem  into  a  ftrong  Giafs  clofe  flopped,  tit 
a  fine  linnen  cloth  over  the  Mouth,  and  turti 
the  Mouth  down  into  another  ftrong  Giafs, 
which  being  fet  in  the  Sun,  an  Oyl  will  diftil 
down  into  the  lower  Giafs,  to  be  prefervefd  as 
precious  for  divetf  ufes,  both  inward  and  out¬ 
ward  as  a  Sovereign  Balm  to  heal  the  Difea- 
firs  ^efore  mentioned,  to  clcer  a  dim  fight,  and 
to  take  away  Ipots ,  marks  and  fears  in  the  jpots  and 
skin.  fears  in 

The  Saw  claims  priviledg  in  it  and  ’tis  un-  the  Sl^in. 
dcT  the  Coeleftid  Ram- 


Memory. 

(iomach) 

Retention 


LI 

Rubarb,  or  Rhapon- 
tick. 


D 


It 


O  not  ftart,  and  fay  this  grows  you  know 
vfaroffj  and  then  asknic.  H  ow 
comes  to  pafs  that  1  bring  it  among  gur 


Englifli  Simples :  for  though  the -name  mc.y 
fpeak  it  Forreignyet  It  grows  with  us  in  Sngr 
land)  and  that  frequent  enough  in  oiu*  Gai^ 
dens,  and  when  you  have  throughly  perufed  its 
Vertues,  you  will  condtrde  it  nothing  inferi¬ 
or  to  that  which  is  Brought  us  out  of  China,  & 
by  that  time  this  hath  been  as  much  ufed  as 
that  hath  been,  the  name  which  the  other 
M  mx  hath 


i-oS  The  Englijh  ^hyjitian. 


bath  gotten  wil  be  eclipfed  by  the  fame  of  this: 
Take  therfore  a  Defcription  at  laige/;f  it,  as 
followtth. 

'Defcnpuon. 

At  the  fiift  appearing  out  of  the  giciind 
when  the  Winter  is  pail,  it  hath  a  great  round 
brownifh  head  rihng  from  the  middle  or  fides 
of  iheReotj  which  cpeneth  it  lelf  into  fundry 
Teats  one  after  another,  very  much  crumpled 
or  folded  together  at  the  fiift,  and  brownifh, 
but  afterward  it  fpreadeth  it  felf  and  becemeth 
fmeoth  very  large  and  almioft  round,  every  one 
ilanding  on  a  brownifti  Stalk  of  the  thicknefs 
of  a  mans  Thumb,  when  they  are  grown  to 
,  their  fulnefs,  and  mofi  of  them  two  foot  and 
more  in-length,  efpecially  when  they  grow  in 
any  moift  or  good  Ground  j  and  the  Stalk  of 
the  Lcai  alfo  from  the  bottom  thereof  to  the 
Leaf  it  felf,  being  alfo  two  Toot ,  The 
breadth  thereof  from  edg  to  edg  in  the 
broadefl  place,  being  alfo  two  foot,  of  a  fad  or 
dark  green  colour,  of  a  fine  tart,  or  fowrifti 
taft,  much  more  pleafant  than  the  Garden  or 
Wood  forrel.  From  among  thefe  rifeth  i*p 
feme  but  not  every  yeer,  a  ftrong  thick  Stalky 
not  growing  fo  high  as  the  Patience  or  Garden 
Lock,  with  fuch  round  Leavs  as  grow  below, 
but  fmallcr,  at  every  Joynt  up  to  the  top,  and 
among  the  Flowers  which  are  white  fpreading 
forth  into  many  Branches,  and  confifting  of 
live  or  fix  fmall  white  Leavs  apiece,  haidly  to 
be  difeerned  from  the  white  threds  in  the  mid¬ 
dle,  and  feeming  to  be  all  threds,  after  which 
come  brownilh  three  fquare  Seed  like  untop- 
ther  Docks,  but  larger  whereby  it  may  be 
plainly  known  to  be  a  Dock.  The  Root  gro- 
iveth  in  time  to  be  very  great,  with  diverfand 
liandry  great  fpreading  Branches  from  it,  of  a 
;dark,  brownifh,  or  reddifh  colour  on  the  out- 
lidc,  with  a  pale  yellow  skin  under  it  which 
covereth  the  inner  fubftance  or  Root,  which 
arind  and  Skin  being  pared  away,  the  Root  ap- 
peareth  offo  frefh  and  lively  a  colour,  with 
Hefh-colour’d  Veins  running  through  it,  that 
jthc  choiceft  of  that  Kubarb  that  is  brought  us 
irom  beyond  the  Seas  cannot  extel  it :  Which 
^oot  if  it  be  dried  carefully  and  as  it  ought 
«(which  muft  be  in  bur  Countrey  by  the  gentle 
iieat  of  a  fire  in  regard  the  Sun  is  not  hot  'e- 
mough  here  to  do  it,  and  every  piece  kept  from 
touching  one  another)  will  hold  his  colour 
almoft  as  well  as  when  it  is  frefh  j  and  hath 
been  approved  of  and  commended  by  thofe 
who  have  oftemimes  ufed  them. 

?lac(. 

Ii.  groweth  in  Gardens,  and  Flowreth  a- 
bout  the  beginning  or  middle  of  Junej  and 
the  Seed  is  ripe  in  July. 

Time. 

The  Roots  that  are  to  be  dried  and  kept  all 
the  yeer  following,  are  not  to  be  taken  up  ber 
fore  the  Stalk  and  Leavs  be  quite  withered  and 
gone,  and  that  is  not  until  the  middle  or  end 


of  Ofteber  j  and  if  they  be  taken  a  little  be¬ 
fore  the  Leavs  do  fpring,  or  when  they  are 
fprung  up,  the  Roots  will  not  have  half  fb 
good  a  colour  in  them. 

I  have  given  the  precedence  unto  this,  be- 
caufin  vertu^s  alfo  it  hath  theprehcminencc  5 
I  cemenow  to  deferibe  unto  you  that  which 
is  called  PatHTJcey  or  Montis  Rub6Yb':>  and 
next  unto  that,  the  great  round  Leav’d 
or  BdftaY.d  RiibaYb  j  for  the  one  of  thefe  may 
happily  fupply  in  the  abfence  of  the  other  5  be¬ 
ing  not  much  unlike  in  their  Vertucs,  only 
one  more  powerful  and  efficacious  than  the 
other  j  Andlafllyj  fhall  fl'.tw  you  the  Ver¬ 
tucs  of  all  the  three  Sorts. 

Garden  Patience,  or 
Monks  Rubarb. 

De/iriiption. 

’'j  His  is  a  Dock,  bearing  the  name  of  Ri^ 
boYb}  for  feme  purging  quality  therein, 
and  groweth  up  with  large  tall  Stalks,  let  with 
fomwhat  broad  and  long  fair  green  Leavs,  not 
dented  at  all;  The  tops  of  the  Stalks  being 
devided  intom.any  find  Branches,  bear  reddifh 
or  purplifh  Flowers,  and  three  fquare  Seed 
like  unto  other  Docks.  The  Root  is  long, 
great  and  yellow  like  unto  the  wila  Decksjbut 
a  little  redder jand  if  it  be  a  little  dried  fheweth 
lefs  ftore  of  dilcoloured  veins,  than  the  next 
doth  when  it  is  dry.  , 

i 

j 

Great  round  leav'd  Dock, 

OR, 

Baftard  Rubarb.  ^ 

DefcYtptiofi. 

^T^His  hath  diverf  large,  round,  thin,  yello- 
wifh  green  Leavs,  rifing  from  the  Root, 
a  little  waved  about  the  edges,  every  one  han¬ 
ding  on  a  reafonable  thick,  and  long  brownifh 
Footftdk;  from  among  which,  rifeth  up  a 
pretty  big  Stalk  about  two  foot  high,  with 
feme  fuch  like  Leavs  growing  thereon,  but 
fmallcr.  At  the  top  whereof  hand  in  a  long 
Spike  many  final  brownifh  Flowers,  which 
turn  into  hard  three  fquare  fhining  brown 
Seed,  like  the  Garden  Prtln  wcc  before  ueferi- 
bed.  This  Root  groweth  greater  than  that, 
with  many  Branches  or  great  Fibres  thereat, 
yellow  on  the  ontfidc,and  fomwhat  pale  yellow 
within,  with  fome  difcolcured  veins  like  to 
the  Rubarb  which  is  firft  deferibed,  but  much 
lefs  than  it,  efpecially  when  it  is  dry. 

Place  and  7 me. 

Thefe  alfo  grow  in  Gardens,and  Flower  and 
Seed  at  or  neer  the  fame  time  that  our  true 
Rubarb  dqth,  they  Flower  in  June,  and 
the  Se©^  is  ripe  in  July. 


Venues 


The  Englljh  Thyfttian. 


Pnrge 
ChoUcr  & 
Fiegm, 
(lay  Laslis 
and  bloody 
Flux, 
Scabs  £>- 
Ukctoics 
Screes, 
^{unnhg 
Sores, 
Pains  of 
the  Ears, 

7 oothach. 
Jaundice, 
fains  of 
the  Sio- 
rnach  & 
loathing  of 
Meat, 
Fjtis^s  E- 
•vil^tone , 
•Urine, 
T>m  fight) 
liver  & 
"Blood, 
ChoUer  & 
Flegm, 
Obftr^ili- 
ens, 

Jauudiee, 
Vroffie, 
Spleen, 
Agues, 
pains  of 
the  fides, 
0^  fitting 
cf  Blood, 
Kutiniitg 
of  the 
"Reins, 
SvoeUing 
in  the 
Head, 
Sciatica, 
Gout, 


lOp 


''  Fertues  and  Ufe 

A  (Irani  of  the  (iried  Root  oi<!lMon\s  7{iibarb, 
iviih  a  fcniple  of  Ginger  made  into  Ponder  and 
taken  falling  in  a  draught  or  mefs  of  warm 
Broth,  purgeth  Choller'and  Flegm  downward 
very  sently,  and  fafely  without  danger  .*  The 
Seed  thereof  contrarily  doth  bind  the  Belly, 
and  helpeth  to  ftay  any  fort  of  Lask  or  Bloody 
Flux-  The  dillilled  water  thereof  is  very  pro¬ 
fitably  ufed  to  heal  Scabs,  as  alfo  foul  Ulcerous 
Sores,  and  to  allay  the  Inflamations  of  them  : 
The  juyee  of  the  Leavs  Or  Roots,  or  the  De- 
coiftion  of  them  in  Vinegar  is  ufed  as  amoft 
effeaual  Remedy  to  heal  Scabs  and  running 
Sores. 

ThcBafiard  Ruba'cbhiihzW  the  properties 
o{  xhe  Monies  Ruboi'b,  but  more  clFedlual  lor 
both  inward  and  outward  Difeafes.  The  Dc- 
codlion  thereof  with  Vinegar  dropped  into  . 
the  Ears,  taketh  away  the  pains  :  gargled  in 
tile  Mouth,  taketh  away  Toothach,  and  be¬ 
ing  drunk  healeth  the  Jaundice.  The  Seed 
thereof  taken  eafeth  the  gnawing  and  griping 
pains  of  the  Stomach,  and  taketh  away  the  loa¬ 
thing  thereof  unto  Meat  t  The  Root  thereof 
helpeth  th'fc  ruggednefs  of  the  Nails,  and  being 
bovled  in  Wine  helpeth  the  Swellings  of  the 

Throat,  commonly  called  the  Kings  evil,  as 

alfo  the  Swellings  of  the  Kernels  of  the  Ears  : 
It  helpeth  them  that  are  troubled  with  the 
Stone  j  provoketh  llrine  ,  and  helpeth  the 
dimnefs  of  the  Sight.  The  Roots  of  this  Bit* 
(iard  7{ubarb  are  ufed  in  opening  and  purging 
Diet  Drinks  with  other  things,  to  open  the 
Liver,  and  to  clenf  and  cool  the  Blood. 

The  properties  of  that  which  is  called  the 
Englijh  Rubarb,  are  the  fame  vVith  the  former, 
but  much  more  effeftual,  and  hath  ^11  the 
properties  of  the  true  IndianRubarb, except  the 
force  in  purging,  wherein  it  is  but  of  half  the 
ftrength  thereof,  and  thtrfore  a  double  quan¬ 
tity  mull  be  ufed  :  it  likewife  hath  not  that  bit- 
ternefs  and  aftriiaion  j  in  other  things  it  wor- 
keth  almoft  in  an  equal  quality,  which  arc 
thefe  ;  It  purgeth  the  Body  of  Choller  and 
Flegm,  being  either  taken  of  it  felf,m-ade  in¬ 
to  Pouder  and  drunk  in  a  draught  of  white 
Wine,  or  fteeped  therein  all  night  and  taken 
falling,  or  put  among  other  Purgers,  as  lhall 
be  thought  convenient,  clenlin^  the  Stomach, 
Liver,  and  Blood,  opening  Obltruflions,  and 
helping  thofc  griefs  that  come  thereof  j  as  the 
Jaundice,  Dropfic ,  fwelling  of  the  Spleen, 
Tertian  and  day  Agues,  and  the  pricking  pain 
of  the  fides ,  and  alfo  it  ftayerh  fpitting  of 
Blood.  The  Pouder  taken  with  CalTia  diifol- 
ved,  and  a  little  walk’d  Fenice  Turpentine, 
elenfeth  the  Reins  and  lltengthneth  them  af¬ 
terwards,  and  is  very  eHedlual  to  ftay  the  run¬ 
ning  of  the  Reins  or  Gonorrea.  It  is  alio  gi-  | 
Yen  for  the  pains  and  fwellings  in  the  Head, 
for  thofe  that  are  troubled  with  Melancholly, 
and  helpeth  the  Sciaticai  the  Gout,  and  the 


Cramp.  The  Pouder  ofRuba'cb  taken  with  a  Cfump, 
little  Mummia  and  Madder  Roots  in  fome  Clotted, 
red  Wine,  diftblveth  clotted  Blood  In  the  Bo-  Blood, 
dy,  hapning  by  any  fall  or  bruife,and  healeth  ttlce'es  in 
biirftings  and  broken  parts  as  well  inward  as  the  Eyes, 
outward  :  The  Oyl  likewife  wherein  it  hath  o'f  Eye- 
been  boyled,  worketh  the  like  cfFefls,  being  lids,fvpel- 
anointed.  It  is  ufed  to  heal  thofe  Ulcers  that  Hugs  &•  _ 
happen  in  the  Eyes  and  Eyelids,  being  fteeped  Inflamati- 
and  ftrained  ’,  as  alfo  to  aftwage  the  Swellings  ons, 
and  Inflamations  J  and  applied  with  Honey,  Black  ^ 
or  boyled  Wine,  it  taketh  away  all  black  and  blue  jpots, 
blue  Spots  or  Marks  that  happen  therein.  Purge  the 
Whey,  or  white  Wine  are  the  bell  Liquors  to  ^ 
fteep  it  in,  and  thereby  it  worketh  more  cfFe-  Stomach^ 
dually  in  opening  Obftrudlions,  and  purging 
the  Stomach  and  Liver.  Many  do  ufe  a  little 
Spicknardasthebeft  Correder  there¬ 
of. 

Af(trs'claims  Predominancy  over  all  thefe 
wholfom  Herbs,  you  cry  out  upon  him  for  an 
infortune,  when  God  created  him  for  your 
good  (only  he  is  angry  with  Fools)  what  dif- 
honor  is  this,  not  to  but  to  God  Him- 

felf. 

Meadow  Rue. 

Deficription, 

'T^His  rifeth  up  with  a  yellow  ftringy  Root,' 

■*  much  fpreading  in  the  ground,  and  fhoo- 
ting  forth  new  fprouts  round  about,  with  ma¬ 
ny  Herby  green  Stalks  two  foot  high,  crefted 
ail  the  length  of  rhemifet  with  Joynts  here  and 
there,  and  many  large  Leavs  on  them  as  well 
as  below,  being  devided  into  fmaller  Leavs,  t 
nicked  or  dented  in  the  forepart  of  them,  of  a 
fad  green  colour  on  the  upperfide,  and  pale 
green  underneath  :  Toward  the  top  of  the 
Stalk  there  ftiooteth  forth  diverf  ftiort  Bran¬ 
ches,  on  every  <me  thereof  there  ftand  two, 
three,  or  four  fmal  round  Heads  or  Buttons, 
which  breaking  the  skin  that  inclofeth  them 
fhew  forth  a  tuft  of  pale  greenifli  yellow  threds> 
which  falling  away  there  comes  in  their  places 
fmall  three  cornreU  Cods,  wherein  is  con¬ 
tained  fmal,  long,  and  round  Seed.  The 
whol  Plant  hath  a  fttong  unpleafant  feent. 

Place. 

It  groweth  in  many  places  of  this  Land  j  in 
the  Borders  of  moift  Meadows,  and  by  Ditch 
fides. 

7ime. 

It  Flowrcth  about or  the  beginning  of 

.Auguft. 

Venues  and  vfe. 

Diofeorides  faith  that  this  Herb  bruifed  and 
applie(i  perfedly  healeth  old  Sores ;  and  the  qi^  fores, 
dillilled  water  of  the  Herb  and  Flowers  doth 
the  like.  It  is  ufed  by  fome  among  other  Pot- 
N  n  herbs 


o 


TJ^e  ^hyjitian. 


herbs  t6'epeii  the  Body  and  make  it  foluble  > 
Open^the  the  Roots  walhed  clean^  and  boyled  in  Ale 
and  d«lhk  proYoketh  to  the  Stool  more  than 
Lice^  the  Leavs  J  but  yet  very  gently.  The  Root 
Vermipe,  boyled  in  Water,  and  the  places  of  the  Body 
lyiaguty-  moft  troubled  with  Vermine  or  Lice,  waihed 
Jaundice,  therewith  while  it  is  warm,  deftroyeth  them 
irtteiiy. '  In  it  is  ufed  againft  the  Plague, 

“  and  in  againft  the  Jaundice,  as6<zwf“ 

vmusimh. 

Garden  Rue. 

THis  is  fo  well  known,  both  by  this  name, 
and  the  Name  Herb  of  Grace 3  that  I  fhal 
not  need  to  write  you  any  further  Defeription 
6f  it :  But  ihall  only  ftiew  you  the  Vertiics  of 
itt  as  followeth. 

Vertues  and  vfe^ 

Vrlne,  It  provoketh  Urine  and  Womens  Courfi^, 
Womens  being  taken  either  in  Meat  or  Drink.  The 
Comfesy  Seed  thereof  taken  in  Wine,  is  anAntidote  a- 
Foyfons,  gainft  all  dangerous  Medicines  or  deadly  Poy- 
FlaguC)  fons.  The  Leavs  taken  either  by  themfclves,. 
Abate  or  with  Figs  and  Walnuts  is  ^  called  Methri- 
yenery,  dam  his  Counter  poyfpn,.agaihft  the  Plague 
fains  of  and  caufeth  all  Venemous  things  to  become 
ihe  Cbeft  harmlefs;  Being  often  taken  in  Meat  or  Drink 
&  Sides 3  it  abateth  Venery,  and  jdeftroyeth  the  ability 
Coughy  to  beget  Children.  A  Decodion  made  thcre- 
Hard  ofwith  fomc  dried  Dill  Leavs  and  Flowers, 
■breathitgy  eafeth  alt  pains  and  torments  inwardly  to  be 
Sciaticay  drunk,  and  outwardly  to  be  applied  warm  to 
&  Joynt  the  place  grieved.  The  fame  being  drunk 
achesy  belpeth  the  pains  both  of  the  Cheft  and 
Agues y  Sidesy  asalfo  Coughs,  hardnefs  of  breathing, 
wind  the  Inflamations  of  the  Lnugs,  and  the  tor- 
Chodicl^y  menting  pains  of  the  S<ti*tica,  and  the  Joynts, 
M other  y  being  anpinted  or  laid  to  the  places,  as  alfo  the 
Wormsy  ftiaking  Fits  of  Agues,to  take  a  draught  before 
Gouty  the  Fit  come.  :  Being  boyled  or  infufed  in 

DropfCy  Qylifis  good  to  help  the  wind  Chollick,  the 

Bleedingj  hardhefs  or  windinefs  of  the  Mother,  andfre- 
Swelling  cth  wdmen  frpiii  the  ftrangling  or  fuffocation 
of  tbeCods  thereof,  if  tihtShare  and  the  Parts  thereabouts 
wheals  &  bo  anointed  therewith  :  It  Wlk^  and  driveth 
Fimplesy  foiththcWorms  of  the  Belly  j  if  it  be  drunk 
after  it.is.bfayledin  Winej  to  the  half  with  a 
littfc  Honey  :  It  helpcth  the  Gout  or  pains  in 
the  Jbynis  of  Hands,  Fept,  or  Knees  applied 
thereunto.:'.,  and  vvith  Figs  it  helpcth  the 
Drophe  being  bathed  therewith  :  being  brui- 
fed  and  put  into  the  Noftrils  it  ftaieth  the 
Bleeding  thweof.  It  helpcth  the  fwelling  of 
the  Cods  if  they  be  bathed  with  a  Dee.oftion 
of  Rue  and  Bay  Leaves.  It  taketh  away 
Wheals  and  Bimples  if  being  bvuifed  with  a 


few  Mirtle  Leavs,  if  it  be  made  up  with  W ax, 

and  applied  •  It  cureth  the  Morphew  and  ta-  Merrphew 

keth  away  all  forts  of  Warts,  if  boyled  in  ^  waxts. 

Wine  with  feme  Pepper  and  Nitre  and 

places  rubbed  therewith  :  and  with  Allum  and  ^ 

Honeys  helpcth  the  dry  Scab  or  any  Tetter  or 

Ringworm  ;  The  juyee  thereof  warmed  in  a  wormy 

Pomegranate  Shel  or  Rind,  and  dropped  into 

the  Ears  helpcth  the  pains  of  them.  Thejuyee  BarSf 

of  it  and  Fennel  with  a  little  Honey,  and  the  Dmfighpf 

Gall  of  a  Cock  put  thereto,  helpcth  the  dim- 

nefs  of  the  Eyelight.  An  Oyntment  made  of 

the  Juyee  thcrof  with  Oyl  of  Rofes,  Cerufs,  1 

and  a  little  Vinegar,  and  anointed  cureth  St. 

Anthonies  Fire,  and  all  foul  running  Sores  in  the  Heady 
the  Head  j  and  the  llinking  Ulcers  of  the  '^jeers  of 
Nofe,  or  other  parts.  The  Antidote  ufed  by  NoJCy 
CMethridates  every  morning  falling  to  fecure  xintidotey 
himfelf  from  any  Poyfon  or  infedion,  was  Vf^ns  of 
this.  T  akc  twenty  Leavs  of  Rue,  a  little  Salt, 
a  couple  of  Walnuts,  and  a  couple  of  Figs  bea- 
ten  together  uy:i3  a  Mafs  with  twenty  Juniper 
Berries,  which  is  the  quantity  appointed  „• 

every  day.  Another  Eleduary  is  made  thus  j  ObJtrHCti- 
Take  of  Nitre,  Pepper,  and  Cummin  Seed, of 
each  equal  Parts,  of  the  Leaves  of  Rue  clean  ‘ 
picked,  as  much  in  weight  as  all  the  other 
three  weighedjBeat  them  well  together,  and 
put  to  as  much  Honey  as  will  make  it  up  into 
an  Eleduary  j  (but  you  mull  firft  fteep  your 
Cumminfeedin  Vinegar  twenty  four  hours, 
and  then  dry  it,or  rather  toaft  it  in  a  hot  Fire- 
fliovel,  or  in  an  Oven)  and  it  is  aRemedy  for 
the  pains  or  griefs  of  the- Cheft  or  Stomach,  of  * 

the  Spleen,  Belly  or  Sides,  by  Wind  or  Stit¬ 
ches  J  of  the  Liver  by  Obftrudions,  of  the 
Reins  and  Bladder  by  the  Hopping  of  Urine, 
and  helpcth  alfo  to  extenuate  corpulent  Bot 
dies. 

What  an  Infamy  is  call  upon  the  Alhes  of 
’Methridates  (or  Methradates,  as  the  .Augu-' 
fanes  read,  his  name)  by  unworthy  people^ 
theythat  deferve  no  good  report  thcmfelves, 
love  to  give  none  to  others,  Vi\.  That  that 
renowned  King  of  Towfas  fbrtified  his  Body 
by  Poyfon  againft  Poyfon  (He  caf  out  Devils 
by  Beel'Kgbub  the  Frince  of  Devils')  what  a  fot 
is  he  that  knows  not  if  he  had  accuftomed  his 
Body  to  cold  Poyfons  hot  Poyfons  would  have 
dilpatch’d  him,  or  the  contrary  if  not,  corro- 
fions  would  have  done  i  t,  the  whol  world  is 
at  this  very  time  beholding  to  him  for  his  Stu-, 
dies  in  Phyfick,  and  he  that  ufeth  the  quan¬ 
tity  of  but  a  Haxel  Nut  of  that  Recept  every 
morning,  to  which  his  name  is  adjoyned  lliall 
to  admiration  preferve  his  Body  in  health,  if 
I  he  do  but  confider  that  Rue  is  an  Herb  of  the 
Sm  and  under  and  gather  it  and  the  reft 
accordingly. 


Rupture 


I 


TIjeEngUJh 


211 


FluxeSf 


Rupturewort. 

Defcriptien. 

THis  fpi-eadeth  very  many  thrcddy  Brann 
ches  round  about  upon  the  groundjabouc 
a  fpan  long,  devided  into  many  other  fmalJcf 
parts,  full  of  fmall  Joynts  fet  very  thick  toge-r 
ther,  whereat  come  forth  two  very  fmall  Leavs 
of  a  freih  yellowifh  green  colour  branches  tmd 
all,  where  growcth  forth  alfo  a  number  of  ex¬ 
ceeding  fmal  yellowifh  Flowers,  fcarce  to  be 
difeerned  from  the  Stalks  and  Leavs,  which 
turn  into  Seed  as  fmal  as  the  very  duft :  The 
Root  is  very  long  and  fmal,  thrufting  down 
deep  into  the  ground  :  This  hath  neither  fmel 
nor  taft  at  firft,  but  afterward  hath  a  little  a- 
ftringent  taft,  without  any  manifeft  heat,  yet 
a  little  bitter  and  lharp  withal. 

riace. 

It  groweth  in  dry,  fandy,  and  Rockic  pla¬ 
ces. 

Time. 

It  is  frefh  and  green  all  the  Summer.  . 

.  Venues  and  Vfe. 

^uptuxeveovthvh  not  hi|,  name  in  vain, 
for'it  is  found  by  experience  to,  cure  the  Rup- 
.  '  ^ture,  not  only  in  Children  but  alfo  in  Elder 
Perfons,  if  the  Difeaf  be  not  too  inveterate, 
by  taking  a  dram  of  the  Pouder  of  the  dried 
Herb  every  day  in  Wine  for  certain  daies  to- 
-  ,  gether  j  Or  the  Decodion  made  in  Wine  and 

c .  • .  .  *  drunk  :  Or  the  juyee  or  diftilled  water  of  the 

Teliow*  manner  j  and 

TnundifP  Fluxes  either  in  men  or  Wo- 

mrms  ?  Vomitings  alfo,  and  the  Gonorrhea 

ivoundl  of  the  Reins,  being  taken  any  of  the 

T>efl>uxl-  aforefaid.  It  doth  alfo  moft  affurcdly 

ons  helpthofe  that  have  the  Strangury,  or  have 
Tout  VI-  topped,  or  are  troubled  with  the 

Stone  or  Gravel  in  their  Reins  or  Bladder. 
The  fame  alfo  helpeth  much  all  Stitches  in  the 
Side,  all  griping  pains  in  the  Stomach  or  Bel¬ 
ly,  the  Obftrudions  of  the  Liver,  and  cureth 
the  yellow  Jaundice  iikewife  :  It  killeth  alfo 
the  Worms  in  Children :  Being  outwardly 
applied  it  conglutineth  Wounds  notably,'  and 
helpeth  much  tb  ftay  Defluxions  of  Rhewm 
from  the  Head  to  the  Eyes,  Nofe,  and  Teeth, 
being  bruifed  green  and  bound  thereto  5  Or 
the  Decodion  of  the  dried  Herb,  to  bath  the 
Forehead  and  Temples,  or  the  Nape  of  Neck 
behind  :  It  alfo  drieth  up  the  moiltufe  of  Fi- 
ftulous  Ulcers,  or  any  others  that  are  foul  and 
fpreading. 

They  fay  Saturn  daufeth  Rupturcs,’if  he  do, 
he  doth  no  naore  than  he  can  cure,  if  you  want 
wit  he  will  teach  you  though  to  your  coft,  this 
Herb  is  Saturns  own,  and  is  a  notable  Anti- 
veneriaiv 


cers. 


J^ufhes. 

ALthough  there  arc  many  kinds  o£Ru{het: 

yet  I  lhall  only  here  ii^ft  upoa  itofe 
wmcnafebeijkppwn,  and  mnft  MedH W 
as  the  Bulrujhes,  and  other  of  the  fo#and 
fmooth  kinds  j  which  grow  fo  cornmojfi.  in 

almoft  everyplace  of  this  Land,  and  areibge. 

ncraUy  noted,  that  I  fuppofe  ft  needlcfs  ta 
nouble  you  with  any  Deferiptfoh  of  th^‘: 

Briefly  then  take  the  Vertues  of  them  «  fol- 

loweth.  ,  ' 

.^£rtm  and  , Vices* 

_  The  Seedaof  thefe  foft 

beii^ 

drunk  in  Wme  and,  Water,  ftayedi  tfe  LaJ 
and  Womens  Courfes,  when  thfy  come  dbwn 
too  abundantly. :  but  it  caufetfa  Hcadach  ;  Ic 
provoketh  lleep  Tikewife  but  muft  be  given 
with  caution,  left  the  party  thauajees  it  wake 
not  until  the  Refurredion  P/i»y  Taith,  The 
Root  boyledin.waterto  the  confumption  of 

one  third,  helpdh  the  Coi^h,  \  - 

Thus  you  icc  that  Convcriicliccs  have  their 
Inconveniences,  and  Vertue  i^feiddm  uha2 
companiedwith  fome  Vices.:  1  hava 

written  concerning  Ru^es  is  to  fafiisfie  .m^ 
Country-mens  QueftiQn,v^rc  mr.RuJbesmk 
fornothmg .?  Yei,  and  as  good  lei  alone  m  wf 
1^  3  There  are  Remedies  enough  without 
them  for  every  Difeaf,  and  therfore  as  the 
Proverb  is,  I  care  not  a  for  them,  or  ra¬ 
ther  they  will  do  you  as  much  good  as  if  one 
had  given  you  a  Rufh. 

Rye 

His  IS  fd  well  known  in  all  the  Countri^ 
of  this  Land,  and  cfpecidlly  ro  the  Coun¬ 
try  people  who  feed  much  thereon,  that  if  I 
fhoulddefcribcit,  they  would  prefently  fay,  I 
might  well  havc  fpared  that  Labor ;  Its  ,  Ver- 
tues  follow. 

.  Virtues  and  vfe.  .  , 

Rye  is  more  digefting  than  Wheat  j  'Tht^>^poftums 
Bread  and  the  Leaven  thereof  ripeneth  and  ^oyts  &■  - 
breaketh  Impoftumes,  Boyls,  and  other  Swel—  ^^cMingSy 
lings :  The  Meal  of  put  betyvecn  a  double  of 
cloth,  and  moiftned  with  alittle  Vinegar,and  Headf 
heated  in  a  Pewter  dlih^  fet  over  a  Chafing-  of , 
dilh  of  coaIs,and  boiuid  faft  to  the  Head  while  Hands 
ic  is  hot,  both  much  eaf  the  (continual  pains  of  Feet. 
the  Head.  Mathiolm  faith.  That  the  afhes  of 
R^e  ftraw  put  into  VVater  and  fufiered  therein  a 
day  ind  a  night,  and  the  Chops  of  the  Hands 
or  Feet  walhed  therewith,  doth  heal  them.  \ 

^  ^  Saft'ron.  . 


•‘S'. 


•if!  t 


'ri! 


ZIX 


ne 


ttan. 


w*utw 

Saffron. 


Conceive,  but  alfo  to  retain  the  Birth  with¬ 
out  inifeafryin?.  Orphem  faith.  Three 
fpooniuls  of  the^  juyee  of  Sage  taken  falling 
with  a  little ;  Honey,  <loth  prefendy  flay  the 
rpitting  or  calling  up  of  Blood.  For  them 
that  are  in  a  Confumption,  thefe  Pills  arc  cm- 
much  commended.  T ake  of  Spicknard  and  ^^piion 
Ginger  of  each  two  drams  j  of  the  Seed  of  hinder 
S^tgetoafted  atthc  fire,  eight  drami,  of  long  j^ij'carri- 
Pepper  twelve  drams,  all  thefe  being  brought 
into  fine  Pouder,  put  thereto  fo  much  Juyee  oi fitting 
Sage  as  may  make  them  into  aMafs  for  Pills,  ^loodj 
taking  a  dram  of  them  every  morning  falling, 
and  fo  likewife  at  nigln,  drinking  a  little  pure 
Water  after  them.  M athi ol us  it  is  scry  pains  of 

profitable  for  all  manner  of  pains  of  the  Head  fhe  Head 
coming  of  cold  and  Rhcwmatick  Humors,  as  t^JayntSy 

,  Kp  ctvpn  at  onctime,tor  it  alfo  for  all  pains  of  the  Joynts,  whether  ufed  paUing- 
not  abov  ten  grams  be  I  inwardly  o?  outwardly,  and  therfore  helpeth 

the  which  IS  the  ,  CoTdi-  the  Falling-fickncfs,  the  Lethargy,  fuch  as  are 

much  ufc  in  all  Dcfluxions  of  Rhewm  itoxti 
the  Head,  and  for  the  Difeafes  of  the  Cheft  or  palfey, 
Breall.  The  Leavs  of  Sage  and  Nettles  brui-  -pefluxi- 
fed  together,  and  laid  upon  the  Impollumc  of 
that  rileth  behind  the  Ears,  doth  aflwage  it  phevatn} 
much  :  The  Juyee  of  Sage  taken  in  warm  wa-  impoftume 
ter,  helpeth  a  Hoarfnefs  and  the  Cough.  The  behind  the 
Leavs  fodden  in-Wine  and  laid  upon  the  place  PoYSy 
affefted  with  the  Palfey  helpeth  much,  if  the  Ho/afne(i 
Decoftion  be  drunk  alfo.  Sage  taken  with  ^  Cougjjy 
Wormwood  is  ufed  for  the  bloody  Flux.  Ttiny  Bloody 
faith,  it  procureth  Womens  Courfes,  and  Hay-  piuxj 
eth  them  coming  down  too  fall,  helpeth  the  Biting  of 
Hinging  and  biting  of  Serpents,  and  killcth  Serpents, 
theWorms  that  breed  in  the  Ears  and  in  Sores,  worms  in 
Sage  is  of  excellent  ufe  to  help  the  Memory,  the  Ears, 
warming  and  ouickning  the  lenfes  j  and  the  or  Sores, 
Conferve  made  of  the  Flowers  is  ufed  to  the  ^inc1{en  . 
fame  purpofe,and  alfo  for  all  the  former  recited  the  fenfes, 
Difeafes.  The  Juyee  of  S^ge  drunk  with  Vi-  ^  help 
negar  hath  been  of  good  ufe  in  the  time  of  Memory, 
_  ..u  likewife  are  firtvp 


iHe  Herb  needs  no  Defeription  it  ! 
being  known  generally,  where  it 
grows-  . 

It  growls  ftequemly  xtivaiden  iti'Bffex,  atid 

inCambrrdg-ffire  '  /•  >  ; 

Verms  and  ft fe.  , 

It  is  an  Herb  of  the  Si/»,  'and  under  the  U- 
an,  and  therfore  you  need  not  demand  a  realon 
whvit  fttengthens  the  heart  fo'exccedinglysLct 
not  abov  ten  grains  be  given  at  one  time, for  i 
the  which  is  the  Fountain  of  may 

dalle  the  Eyes  and  make  them  blind,  a  Cordi¬ 
al  being  taken  in  an  immoderate  quantity  may 

hurt  the  Heart  inllead  of  helping  it.  It  quic- 

ktnthe  Brain,  for  the  Sun  is  eialted  mV 
tsweUashe  hath  his  Houfe  m  ^  «  help 
Confumption  of  the  Lungs,  help  difficulty  of 
breathing  :  it  is  an  excellent  thing  in  Epide¬ 
mical  Difeafes,  as  Pefiilences,  final  ^ox,  and 
Meafles  :  It  is  a  notable  expulfive  Medicine, 

and  a  notable  Remedy  for 

Mv  own  Opinion  is  (but  1  have  no  Author 

for  it)  that  Hermodaftils  is  nothing  elfe  but 

the  Roots  of  Saffron  dried,  and  myreafoms, 

that  the  Roots  of  all  Crocus  both  white  and 
vdlow  purge  Flegm  as  Hermodadtils  and 
if  you  pleafe  to  dry  the  Roots  o{  any  Crocu^ 
neither  your  eye  nor  your  tail  fhal  diftinguilh 
it  from  Hermodaftils* 


e. 


'OVol(e 

■ine,^'o~ 

ms 

mfes, 
xpeL  the 
eadChild 
'  After- 


eeding, 
enfe  Ul- 

'S  & 


Sag 

OUr  ordinary  Garden  Sage  needeth  no 
Defeription. 

Time- 

It  Flowrcth  in-or  about  7w/y. 

Verms  and  Vfe.  . 

A  Dccoftion  of  the  Leavs  and  Braiiches  of 
S4?e  made  and  drunk,  faith  rDiofcorides  fro- 
voketh  Urine,bringeth  down  Womens  Cour¬ 
fes,  helpeth  to  expel  the  dead  Child,  and  cau- 
feth  the  hairs  to  become  black  It  ftaieth  the 
bleeding  of  Wounds,  and  clenfcth  foul  Ulcers 
or  Sores  j  The  faid  Dccoftioh  made  in  Wme 
taketh  away  the  itching  of  the  Cods  t^hey  be 
bathed  therwith.  ^grippa  faith.  That  it 
Women  that  cannot  conceive  by  realon  ot  tne 
moift  flipperinefs  of  their  Wombs  fball  take  a 
.Jn*  Tnurp  of  Sa(re  wilh  a  little 


plague  at  all  times.  Gargles  likewile  are  Sore 
made  with  Sage,  Rofemary,  Honeyfuckles,  Mouths& 
and  Plantaneboyledin  Wine  or  Water,  with  Throats,''] 
fomc  Honey  and  Allum  put  thereto,  to  wafh  Canliers, 
fore  Mouthes  and  Throats,  Cankers,  or  the  Palfey 
fccretpartsofmanor  woman  as  need  reqiii- or  Cr/iwp, 
reth.  And  with  other  hot  and  comfortable  Stitch  in 
Hcrbs.Soge  is  boyled  to  bath  the  Body  or  Lep  the  fde. 
in  the  Summer  time,  cfpccially  to  warm  cold 

Joynts  or  Sinews  troubled  with  the  Palfey  or 
Cramp,  and  to  comfort  and  ftrengthen  the 
parts.  It  is  much  commended  againft  the 
Stitch  or  pains  in  the  fide  coming  ot  Wind,  if 
the  place  be  fomented  warm  with  the  Decocn- 
on  thereof  in  Wine,  and  the  Herb  after  thfe 
boyling  be  laid  warm  alfo  thereunto. 

Jupiter  claims  this,  and  bid  me  tell  you  it 


Si  i  *“  , 


The  Engltjh  fhyfttian. 


VVood-Sage. 

'  i 

Vefcriptien- 

\  T\  T  OOd-Sage  rifeth  up  with  fquarc 
V  V  hoary  Stalks  two  foot  high  at  the 
leaft,  with  two  Leavs  fct  at  every  Joym,  fom- 
what  like  other  Sage  Leavs,  but  fmaller,  fof- 
ter j  3nd  rounder^  ^iid  3.  little  ucnted.  *1 

bout  the  edges  and  hnelling  fomwhat  ftrongly:  ^ 
At  the  tops  of  the  Stalks  and  Branches  Ifand 
the  Blowers  on  a  flender  long  Spike  turning 
themfelvcs  all  one  way  when  they  blow,  and 
arc  of  a  pale  and  whitifh  colour,  fmallerthan 
Sage,  but  hooded  and  gaping  like  unto  them  . 
The  Seed  is  blackilh  ana  round,  four  ufually 
fet  in  a  husk  together  *  The  Root  is  long  and 
ftringy,  with  diveife  Fibres  thereat,  andabi-^ 
deth  many  yeers. 

Tlace. 

It  groweth  in  Woods,  and  by  Wood^fides, 
as  alio  in  diverfe  Fields  and  bj^Lancs  in  this 
Land. 

Time, 

It  FloWreth  in  June^  July,}  and  ^Augu^. 

Vertttes  and  Ufe. 

The  Dccoftion  of  provoketh  U- 

Tr evokes  rinc  ana  W  omens  Courfes :  it  alfo  provoketh 
•V-nne}  &  digefteth  Humors,  and  difeufleth  Swel- 

womens  ^^odes  in  the  Flcfh,  and  is  there- 

Courfes,  fore  thought  to  be  good  againft  the  French 
&  jweat,  'j'he  Decodion  of  the  gieen  Herb 

Sjvellifigs  with  Wine  is  a  fate  and  fure  Remedy  for 
in  the  thofewhoby  falls,  bruifes,  or  Blows,  doubt 
flejh}  forr.c  Veinto  be  inwardly  broken,  to  difpcrfe 
french  avoid  the  congealed  blood,  and  to  confo- 

T* 0X3  lidate  the  Vein  j  It  is  alfo  good  for  fuch  as  are 
Vetti  inwardly  or  outwardly  buriicn,  the  drink  ufed 
hYo1{en,  inwardly,  and  the  Herb  applied  outwardly : 
Bti'i  ftenefi}  ufgj  jjj  fame  manner  is  found  to 

falfey,  be  a  fure  Remedy  for  the  Palfey  :  The  juyee 
VlceYS&  of  the  Herb  or  the  Ponder  thereof  dried,  is 
So'/ct,  good  for  moift  Ulcers  and  Sores  in  theLegs  or 
Gsem  other  parts,  to  dry  them,  and  caufthem  to  heal 
Wounds,  more  fpeedily  :  It  is  no  lefs  eftedual  alfo 
in  green  Wounds  to  ^  ufed  upon  any  occafi- 
on. 


‘ij?  4? ‘I? ‘1“  ^ ^  ^  ^ 'I' ^ 


Solomons  Seal. 


V>cfcription, 

THe  common  Solomons  Seal  rifeth  up 
with  a  round  Stalk  about  half  a  yard 
high,  bowing  or  bending  down  to  the 
top,  fet  with  fingle  Leavs  one  above  another, 
fomwhat  large  and  like  the  Leavs  of  the  Lilly- 
Convalley,  or  May  Lilly, with  an  eye  of  blew- 


ifli  upon  the  green,  with  fome  ribs  therein, 
and  more  yellowifh  underneath  •  At  the  foot 
of  every  Leaf  almoft  from  the  bottom  up  to 
the  top  of  the  Stalk  come  forth  imall  long 
white  and  hollow  pendulous  Flowers,  fom¬ 
what  like  the  Flowers  of  May-Lilly,  but  en¬ 
ding  in  five  long  points,  for  the  moft  part  two 
together,  at  the  end  of  a  long  Footftalk,  and  . 
fomtimes  but  one,  and  fom.etimes  alfo  two 
Stalks  with  Flowers  at  the  Foot  of  a  Leaf, 
which  are  without  any  feent  at  all',  and  Hand 
all  on  one  fide  of  the  Stalk :  After  they  arc 
paftj  come  in  their  places,  final  round  Berries, 
green  at  the  fir  ft,  and  blackifh  green,  tejidirtg 
toblewnefs  when  they  are  ripe,  whet ein  lie 
final  white  hard  and  ftony  Seed  :  The  Root  is 
of  the  thicknels  of  ones  finger  or  Thumb, 
white  and  knobbed  in  fome  places,  with  a  flat 
round  circle  reprefenting  a  Seat,  whereof  it 
took  the  name,  lying  along  under  the  upper 
cruft  of  the  Earth,andnot  growing  downward 
but  with  many  fibres  underneath. 

Viace , 

It  is  frequent  in  diverfe.places  of  this  Land, 
as  namely  in  a  Wood  two  miles  from  C^teV’-' 
bury,  by  Fiflipool-Hill :  as  alfo  in  a  buftiy 
Clofe  belonging  to  the  Parionage  oiAlderhury 
neer  Clarinden,  two  miles  from  Salkbu-ry  •,  in 
CheJJon  Wood,  on  Chejjcn  Hill,  between 
’y^iwtngion  and  Sitttngborn.  in  Y^cnt ,  and  in 
diverfe  other  places,  in  Ejftx  and  other 
Counties. 

■Time.  . 

It  Flowrerh  about  May,  The  Root  abidetb, 
and  fl'iooteth  anew  every  yeer.  . 

Venues  and  vfe. 

The  Root  of  Solomons  Seal  is  found  by  tTt- 
perienceto  be  available  in  Wounds,  iiuns,k^ounds 
and  outward  Sores,  to  heal  and  dole  j.ip  the  ^  Sor^y, 
lips  of  thofe  that  are  green,  and  to  dry  up  and  ^ omiting 
reftrain  the  Flux  of  Humors  to  thofe  that  Elet- 
old  :  It  is  fingular  good  to  flay  Vomitings, 
and  Bleedings  wherefoever,as  alfo  ai  Fluxes  in  Fluxes, 
man  or  woman,whether  the  Whites  or  Reds  in  R-^mning 
W  omen,  or  the  running  of  the  Reins  in  men  j'’/ 
alfo  to  knit  any  Joynt  which  by  weaknefs 
feth  to  be  often  out  of  place,  or  will  not  &.3.y  Ryiit 
in  long,  when  it  is  fet :  alfo  to  knit  and  joyn  T^ynts, 
broken  Bones  in  any  part  of  the  Body,  the  ^  broken 
Roots  being  bruifed  and  applied  to  the  place ;  Rones  in 
Yea  it  hath  been  found  by  late  experience  that  ^ 

,  the  Decodion  of  the  Root  in  Wine,  or  the^^^/^j 
bruifed  Root  put  in  Wine  or  other  drink,  and  Rtipturesj 
after  a  nights  infufion  ftrained  forth  hard  and 
drunk,  hath  holpen  both  man  and  Beaft  whofe 
Bones  have  been  broken  by  any  occafion, 
which  is  the  moft  alfured  refuge  of  help  to 
people  of  diverfe  Countries  of  this  Land,  that 
they  can  have:  It  is  no  lefs  eifedual  tofaelp 
Ruptirrc  and  Burftings,  the  Decodion  in 
Wine,  or  the  Pouder  in  Broth  or  Drink  being 
inwardly  taken  and  outwardly  applyed  to  the 
place :  The  fiuneis  alfo  available  for  inward 

O  o  or 


114 


The  Englijh  'Phyjitwt. 


or  outward  Bruifes,  Falls  or  Blows^  both  to 
Bruifes  &  djfpel  the  congealed  bipod,  and  to  take  away 
FaUsj  both  the  pains  and  the  black  and  blew  Marks 
bliicf(  &  that  abide  after  the  hurt.  The  fame  alfo  or  the 
blew  diflilled  water  of  the  whol  Plant  ufed  to  the 
Face  or  other  part  of  the  Skin,  clenfcth  it 
BcAmifie  fi-om  Morphtw,  Freckles,  Spots}  or  Mark? 
the  Fa££*  wha^oever,  leaving  the  place  frefli,  fair,  and 
OLovely,  for  which  purpofe  it  is  much  ufed  by 
the  Italifiv  Dames. 

Sawni  owns  this  Plant  for  he  loves  his  Bo^es 
well. 

*  Samp  ire. 

Vefeription. 

He  Rock  Sampire  groweth  up  with  a  ten¬ 
der  green  Stalk,  about  half  a  yard  or  two 
foot  high  at  the  mofl,  branching  forth  almoft 
from  the  very  bottom,  and  ftored  with  fundry 
thick,  and  almoll  round  fomwhat  long  Lcavs, 
of  a  deep  green  colour,  fomtimes  three  toge¬ 
ther,  and  fomtimes  more  on  a  Stalk,  and  are 
fappyj  and  of  a  pleafant,  hot,  or  fpicy  tail :  At 
the  tops  of  the  Stalk  and  Branches,  ftand  Um¬ 
bels  of  white  Flowers,  and  after  them  come 
large  Seed  bigger  than  Fennel  Seed,  yet  fom¬ 
what  alike.  The  Root  is  great,  white,  and 
l^ng,  continuing  many  yeers,  and  is  of  a  hot 
Ipicy  taif  likewiTe. 

Tla(e> 

It  groweth  on  ihe  Rocks  that  are  often  moi- 
ilened  at  the  leaft,  if  nor  overflown  with  the 
Sea  water. 

Time. 

And  it  Flowreth  and  Seedeth  in  the  end  of 
July  and  Augu^. 

Vertues  and  life. 

Helps  di-  It  is  a  fafe  Herb,  very  pleafant  both  to  the 
tk^ion  Stomach,  helping  digeftion,  and  in 

Opens  *  opening  the  Obftruftions  of  the  Li- 

nhflvuFT)-  and  Spleen,  provoking  Urine,  and  hel- 
ensj  pro-  thereby  to  waih  away  the  Gravel  and 
vo^esVrin.-  ^^^^^  ingendred  in  the  Kidneys  or  Bladder. 

we/  and 
the  Slone. 

Sanicle. 

Vefcriplipn. 

Hc.ordinary  Samcle  fendeth  forth  many 
great  round  Leavs  flanding  upon  long 
brownilh  ftalkes,  every  one  fomewhat  deep¬ 
ly  cut  or  divided  into  five  or  fix  parts ,  and 
fome  of  thofe  alfo  cut  in,  fomwhat  like  the 
Leaf  of  a  Crowfoot,  or  Doves-foot,  and  fine¬ 
ly  dented  about  the  edges,  fmooth,  and  of  a 
dark  green  ftiining  colour,  and  fomtimes  red- 
'  difh  about  the  Brims,  from  among  which  ri- 
feth  up  final  round  green  Stalks  without  any 
Joynt  or  Leaf  ^ereon^  fav^ng  at  the  top. 


where  it  brancheth  forth  into  Flowers,  having 
a  Leaf  devided  into  three  or  four  parts  at  that 
Joynt  with  the  Flowers,  which  are  final  and 
whit,  flarting  out  of  final  round  grecnifti  yel¬ 
low  heads,  many  ftanding  together  in  a  tuft  > 
in  which  afterward  are  the  Se-cds  contained, 
which  arc  final  round  rough  Burs,  fomwhat 
like  the  Seeds  of  Cleavers,  and  flick  an  th» 
fame  manner  upon  any  thing  that  they  touch  : 

The  Root  is  compofed  of  many  black  flrings 
or  fibres  fet  together,  at  a  little  long  hea5^, 
which  abideth  with  the  green  Leavs  all  the 
Winter  and  perifli  not. 

Tlace. 

It  is  found  in  many  ftiadowy  Woods,  and 
ether  places  of  this  Land. 

Time. 

It  Flowreth  in  June,  and  the  Seed  is  ripe 
fliortly  after. 

Verms  and  vfe. 

It  is  exceeding  good  to  heal  all  green  Croen 
Wounds  Ipeedily,  or  any  Ulcers,  Impoflumes,  Wounds, 
or  bleedings  inwardly  :  It  doth  wonderfully 
help  thofe  that  have  any  Tumors  in  any  part  impoftums 
of  their  Bodies,  for  it  reprefleth  and  diffipa-  Inward 
teth  the  Humors,  if  the  Decoftion  or  juyee  Bleedings, 
thereof  be  taken,  or  the  Pouder  in  drink,  and  Swellings, 
the  Juyee  ufed  outwardly  j  For  there  is  not  ulcers  in 
found  any  Herb  that  can  give  fuch  present  the  Mouth 
help  cither  to  Man  or  Beaft  when  the  Difeafe  Throat 
fallethupon  the  Lungs  or  Throat, and  to  heal  Privities, 
up  all  the  putrid  Malignant  Ulcers  in  the  Womens 
Mouth,  Throat,  and  Privities,  by  gargling  Courfes, 
or  wafhing  with  the  Decoftion  of  the  heays  Fluxes  of 
and  Root,  made  in  Water,  and  a  little  Honey  Blood, 
put  thereto.  It  helpeth  to  flay  Womens  Cour-  Las^s, 
fes,  and  ail  other  Fluxes  of  Blood  either  by  the  Ulcers  in 
Mouth,  Urine  or  Stool,  and  Lasks  of  the  Bel-  the  Ffid- 
ly,  the  Ulceration  of  the  Kidneys  alfo, -and  the  neys,  Kun- 
pains  in  fhe  Bowels,  and  the  Goilorrhea  or  ning  of  the 
running  of  the  Reins,  being  boyled  in  Wine  Reins, 
or  Water,  and  drunk  :  The  fame  alfo  is  no  lefs  Rupture. 
powerful  to  help  any  Ruptures  or  Burflings, 
ufed  both  inwardly  and  outwardly,  and  briefly 
it  is  effeftual  in  binding,  reftraining,  confoli- 
dating, heating, drying, and  healing  J  as  Com-  ' 

fry.  Bugle,  Self-heal,  or  any  other  of  the  Con¬ 
founds,  or  Vulnerary  Herbs  whatlocver. 

This  is  one  of  Venushtr  Herbs  to  cure  ei¬ 
ther  Wounds,  dr  what  other  mifehiefe  Mars 
inflifleth  upon  the  Body  of  Man. 

Sarafei^s  Confound. 

Defeription. 

His  groweth  very  high  fomtimes  with 
brownifli  Stalks,  and  other  whiles  with 
green  and  hollow  to  a  mans  height, having  ma¬ 
ny  long  and  narrow  green  Leavs  Inip’d  about 
the  edges,  fomwhat  like  thofe  of  the  Peach- 
^  ■  Tree, 


Tlje  EngUp?  ^hyjttian. 


ObflT  uU'i- 
ms. yellow 
JaundkCi 
Dropfie, 

V leers  of 
the  Rems} 
Inward 
wounds  & 
BruifeSi 
'Pains  in 
the  Body, 
Mother, 

Creen 
wounds, 
old  Sores 
or  Vlcers, 
’Ulcers  in 
the  Mouth 
or  Throat, 
Sores  in 
the  Privy 
Parts. 


TveCj  er  Willow  Leavs,  but  not  of  fuch  a 
white  green  colour ;  The  tops  of  the  Stalks 
arc  furni^cd  with  many  pale  yellow  Starlike 
Flowers  {landing  in  green  heads,  wjrich  when 
they  are  falltnj  and  the  Seed  ripe,  which  is 
fomwhat  long,  fmal,  and  of  a  ycllowiflr  brown 
colour  wrapped  in  down,  is  therewith  carried 
away  with  the  wind  :  The  Root  is  compofed 
of  many  firings  or  fibres,  fet  together  at  a 
head,  which  perifh  not  in  Winter,  but  abide, 
although  the  Stalks  dry  away,  and  no  Leaf  ap- 
pcareth  in  Winter.  The  tail  hereof  is  ftrong 
and  unplcafantj  and  fo  is  the  fmel  alfo.. 

Place. 

It  groweth  in  moift  and  wet  grounds  by 
Wood  fidcs,  and  fomtimes  in  the  moift  places 
of  fhady  Gtoves,  as  alfo  by  the  water  fide. 

Time. 

It  Flowrcth  in  July,  and  the  Seed  is  foon 
lipe,  and  carryed  away  with  the  wind. 

Veriues  and  Vfe. 

Among  the  Germans,  this  Wound  Herb  is 
preferred  before  all  others  of  the  fame  quality. 
Being  boiled  in  Wine  and  drunk,  it  helpcth 
fhe  indifpofition  of  the  Liver,  and  freeth  the 
Gall  from  Obftrudions,  whereby  it  is  good 
for  the  yellow  Jaundice,  and  for  the  Dropfic 
in  the  beginning  of  it,  for  all  inward  Ulcers 
of  the  Reins,  or  elfwherc,  and  inward  Wounds 
anoBruifes:  And  being  fteeped  in  Wine  and 
then  diftilled,.  the  Water  thereof  drunk  is  fin- 
gulargoodto  eafe  all  gnawings  in  the  Sto¬ 
mach,  or  other  pains  of  the  Body,  as  alfo  the 
pains  of  the  Mother  :  And  being  boyled  in 
Water  it  helpeth  continual  Agues  j  And  this 
faid  Watcr,or  the  fimple Water  of  theHerb  di- 
ftillcd,  or  the  Joyce  or  Decoftion,  are  very 
cffedual  to  heal  any  green  Wound  or  old  fore 
or  Ulcer  whatfoever,  elenfing  them  from  cor¬ 
ruption  and  quickly  healing  them  up  :  It  is  no 
lets  eft'edual  for  the  Ulcers  in  the  mouth  or 
Throat,  be  they  never  fo  foul  or  ftinking,  by 
waftiing  and  gargling  them  therewith  5  and 
likewife  for  fuch  Sores  as  happen  in  the  privy 
parts  of  man  or  Woman  :  Briefly  whatfoever 
hath  been  faid  of  Bugle  or  Sanicle,  may  be 
found  herein. 

Saturn  owns  this  Herb,  and  ’tis  of  fober 
condition  like  him. 

Sawce  alone,  or  Jack  by 
the  Hedg. 

Defer!  pt!  on. 

T He  lower  Leavs  of  this  are  rounder  than 
thofc  that  grow  towards  the  tops  of  the 
Stalks,  and  are  fet  fingly  one  at  a  j  oynt,  being 
fomwhat  round  and  broad,  and  pointed  at  the 
ends,  dented  alfo  about  the  edges,  fomwhat  re- 


fembling  Nettle  Leavs  for  the  form  but  of  a 
frefher  green  colour,  and  not  rough  or  pric¬ 
king  :  The  Flowers  are  very  fmal  and  white, 
growing  at  the  tops  of  the  Stalks  one  above  a- 
nother, which  being  paft_, there  follow  final  and 
long  round  pods,  wherein  are  cantained,  fmal 
round  Seed  fomwhat  blackifti :  The  Root  is 
ftringy  and  threddy,  peri  ftiing  every  yeer  af¬ 
ter  it  hath  given  Seed,  andraifeth  it  fclf  again 
of  its  own  fowing :  The  Plant  or  any  part 
thereof  being  bruifed,fmelleth  of  Garlickjbut 
more  picafantly,  and  tafteth  fomwhat  hot  and 
fbarp,  almoft  like  unto  Rocket. 

Place. 

It  groweth  under  Wallsj  and  by  Hedg  fiides, 
and  Pathwaies  in  Fieldsjin  many  places. 

Time. 

It  Flowreth  in  June,  July,  and  .AuguJ. 

Venues  and  ufe. 

Thisiscatenby  many  Country  people  as 
Sawce  to  their  Salt-fifli,  and  helpcth  well  to 
digeft  the  crudities  and  other  corrupt  Humors  . 
ingendred  thereby,  it  warmeth  alio  the  Sto-  Helps  dl- 
mach,  and  caufeth  digeftion  :  The  juyet  ge^ion, 
thereof  boyled  with  Honey,  is  accounted  to  Cough, 
be  as  good  as  Hedg-Mufter  for  the  Cough,  to  Tough 
cut  and  expedlorate  the  tough  Flegm.  The  Plegm, 
Seed  bniifcd  and  boyled  in  Wine  is  a  fingcflav  Wim- 
goodRcmedy  for  the  Wind  Chollick,  cr  the  ChoUtG 
1  the  Stone,  being  drunk  warm  ',  It  is  alfo  gi-  Stone, 
yen  to  Women  troubled  with  the  Mother,  Ulcersln 
both  to  drink,  and  the  Seed  put  into  a  Cloth  the  Legs. 
and  applied  while  it  is  wai-m  is  of  lingular 
good  life.  The  Leavs  alfo  or  Seed  boyled  is 
good  to  be  ufed  in  Clyfters  to  cafe  the  pains 
of  the  Stone :  The  green  Leavs  are  held  to  be 
good  to  heal  the  Ulcers  in  the  Legs. 

Winter  and  Summer 
Savory. 


cn- 


BOth  thefe  are  fo  well  known  (being  _ 

tertained  as  conftant  Inhabitants  in  our 
Gardens)  that  they  need  no  Defcriptioii, 

Vertues  and  Ufe. 

They  are  both  of  them  hot  and  dry,  efpeci- 
allythe  Summer  kind,  which  is  both  lharp 
and  quick  in  taft,  expelling  Wind  in  the  Sto- ExpeUetb 
mach  and  Bowels,  and  is  a  prefent  help  for  the  wind, 
riling  of  the  Mother  procured  by  Wind,  pro-  Mother, 
voketh  Urine  end  Womens  Courfes,  and  is  provoiies 
much  commended  for  Women  with  Child  to  Vr'me& 
take  inwardly,  and  to  fmcli  often  unto.  It  cut-  Womens 
teth  tough  Hegni  in  the  Cheft  and  Lungs,  Courfes, 
and  helpeth  to  expeftorate  it  the  more  ealily  •,  Tough 
It  qucnchcth  the  dull  fpirits  in  the  Lethargy,  Flegm, 
the  juyee  thereof  being  fnuffed,  or  call  up  in-  Lethargy, 
to  tha  Noftrils  :  The  Juyee  dropped  into  tht  Dull  fight* 
Eyes  clearhh  a  dull  light,  if  it  proceed  of  thin 
O  o  cold 


2i6 


Ringing  in 
the  Ecfrs 
&  Deaf- 
?iefi3 
Sciaticii 
&■  Falfey, 
fimgmg  of 
Bets  &c. 

CkoUkl^, 

lUpacli 

fdjjion. 


Clenfeth 
the  Reinh 
Stmj 


The  EngUJJ?  ^hyfitian. 


cold  humors  difiilling  from  the  Brain .  The 

JuycG  heated  with  alittl,e  Oyl  of  Roles^  arm 
dropped  into  the  Ears  eafeththem  oftk  noifc 
and  finging  in  them^  and  of  deafnels  alio : 
Outwardly  applied  w'^  white  flower  in  man¬ 
ner  of  a  Pultis,  it  eiveth  eafe  to  the  Sciaticaj 
andPalfey’d  Members,  heating  and  warming 
them,  and  taketh  away  their  pains :  It  alio  ta- 
keth  away  the  pain  that  comes  of  flanging  by 
Bees,  Wafps,  Sic.  ^ 

^Mercury  claims  the  Dominion  over  this 
■Herb,  neither  is  there  a  better  Remedy  againfl: 
the  Ghollick  and  llliack  pflions  than  this 
Herb,  keep  it  dry  by  you  all  the  ycer  if  you 
love  vour  felves,  and  your  eafe,  as  ’tis  an  huri- 
dred  pound  to  a  penny  if  you  do  not :  keep  it 
dry  5  make  Conferves  and  Syrups  of  it  for 
your  ufe  j  and  withal,  take  notice  that  the 
Summer  kind  is  the  befl:» 

The  common  white 
Saxifrage. 

Defeription- 

THis  hath  a  few  fmal  reddifh  Kernels  ^  or 
Roots,  covered  with  fomc  Skins  lying 
among  diverfe  fmal  blackifla  Eibres,  whi^ 
fend  forth  diverfe  round,  faint,  or  yellowifti 
sreen  Lcavs,  and  grayifh  underneath,  lying 
above  the  ground  unevenly  dented  about  the 
edges,&fomwhat  hairy, every  one  upon  a  little 
footftalk  from  whence  rifeth  up  a  round  brow- 
nifti  hairy  green  ftalk,  two  or  three  foot  high, 
with  a  few  luch  like  round  Leaves  as  grow  be¬ 
low,  but  flnaller,  and  fomwhat  branched  at  the 
top,  whereoii  Rand  pretty  large  white  lowers 
of  five  Leaves  apiece,  with  fome  yellow  threds 
an  the  middle,  handing  in  long  creftedbrov^ 
nifti  green  Husks  :  After  the  Blowers  are  patt 
there  arifeth  fomtimes  a  round  hard  head  by, 
forked  at  the  top,  wherein  is  contained  fmall 
Hackifh  Seed,  but  ufually  they  fall  away  with¬ 
out  any  Seed  j  and  it  is  the  Kernels  or  grains 
of  the  Root  which  are  ufually  called  the  white 
Saxifrage  Seed,  and  fo  ufed. 

Tlace- 

It  grow^th  in  many  places  of  our  Land,  as 
well  in  the  lower  moift,  as  in  the  upper  diy 
corners  of  Meadows,  andgrafFy  fandy  placw  j 
Lt  ufed  to  grow  neer  Lambs  Conduit,  on  the 
hack  fide  of  Crayes-Jnn- 
TmCfi 

It  Plowreth  in  May 3  and  is  then  gathered 
as  well  for  that  which  is  called  the  Seed, 
as  to  diftil,  for  it  quickly  perifheth  down 
to  tlie  ground  when  any  hot  weather 
comes. 

Venues  and  ufe. 

'  It  is  very  cfFeftual  to  clenfe  the  Reins  and 
Bladder,and  to  djifolvc  the  Stpne  ingendred  in 


them,  and  to  expel  it  and  the  Gravel  by  U- Criit/e/,  , 
rine,  to  provoLe 'Urine  alfo  being  flopped, 
and  to  help  the  Strangury  :  for  which  purpo-  Vrinet 
fes  the  Deco  ft  ion  of  the  Herb  or  Roots  in 
white  Wine,  or  the  Pouder  ofthe  fmal  Ker- 
nelly  Roots  which  is  called  the  Seed  taken  in 
white  Wine,  or  in  the  fame  Decoftion  made 
with  white  Wine  is  mofl  ufual.  The  Diflilled 
water  of  the  whol  Herb,  Roots,  and  Blowers, 
is  mofl  familiar  to  be  taken :  It  provoketh  al¬ 
fo  Womens  Courfes,  andfreeth  and  clenfeth 
the  Stomach  and  Lungs  from  thick  and  tough  ■ 

Bkgm  that  troubles  them.  There  is  not  ma- 
ny  better  Medicines  to  break  the  Stone  than 
this. 

Burnet  Saxifrage. 

Defeription- 

YHe  greater  fort  of  our  Englifh  Burnet 
Saxifrage  gro'weth  up  with  diverfe  long 
Stalks  of  winged  Lcavs,  fet  direftly  oppofite 
one  to  another  on  both  fidcs,  each  being  fom- 
what  broad,  a  little  pointed  and  dented  about 
the  edges,  of  a  fad  green  colour.  At  the  tops 
of  the  Stalks  itend  Umbels  of  white  Flowers, 

'after  which  comes  fmall  and  blackifh  Seed: 

The  Root  is  long  and  whhifli,  abiding  long. 

Our  leffer  Burnet  SaxifragCi  hath  much  finer 
Leaves  than  the  former,  and  very  fmal,  and 
fet  one  againfl  another,  deeply  jagged  about 
the  edees,  and  of  the  fame  colour  as  the  for¬ 
mer  :"^The  Umbels  of  Blowers  arewhitc,and 
the  Seed  very  fmall,  and  fo  is  the  Root,  being 
alfo  fomwhat  hot  and  quick  in  tafi. 

Place. 

Thefe  grow  in  mofl  Meadows  of  this  Land,' 
and  are  eafic  to  be  found,  being  .well  fought 
for  among  ^he  Grafs,  wherein  many  times 
they  lie  hid  fcarcely  to  be  difeern’d. 

Time. 

I  They  Blower  about  Jw/y,  and  their  Seed  is 
ripe  in  Muguft. 

Venues' and  ufe. 

Thefe  Saxifrages  arc  as  hot  as  Pepper,  and 
Tragus  faith  by  his  experience  they  are  more 
wholfom  :  They  have  the  fame  properties 
that  the  Parfleys  have,  but  in  provoking  U-  provo\e 
rinc,  and  eafing  the  pains  thereof,,  or^  of  the  Vrine3 
Wind  and  Chollick,  are  much  more  cfteftual  j  Eafe  Wind 

The  Roots  or  Seed  being  ufed  either  in  T^o\i-  coUicli, 

der,  or  in  Dftoftion,  or  any  other  way  J  and  Mother3 
like  wife  helpeth  the  Windy  f)ains  of  the  Ms-  promens 
ther,  and  to  procure  their  Courfes,  to  Courfes3 

and  avoid  the  Stone  in  the  Kidneys,  to  digefl  St0ne3 
cold,  vifcuous,  and  tough  Blcgm  in  the 
mach,  and  is  a  mofl  efpecial  Remedy  againfl  plegyn, 
all  kind  of  Venom.  Cajhreutn  being  boy-  Venonh 
led  in  the  diflilled  water  hereof,  is  lingular 
good  to  be  given  to  thsfl  that  are  troubled 


The  Engltjh  ThyfttUn. 


217 


Cramps  &  with  Crarrps  and  Convulfions :  feme  do  ufe 
Convuji-  to  make  the  Seed  into  Comfits  fas  they  do 
cfisi  Caraway  Sccdj  which  is  effcftual  to  all  the 
i»  purpofes  aforefaid.  Thejuyee  of  the  Herb 
/be  Head,  drcppetl  into  the  moft  grievous  Wounds  of 
I'rcckles  the  Head;,  dricrh  up  their  moiflure  and  hea- 
& (potr,  leth  them  quickly.  Some  Women  ufe  the  di- 
ftilledWacerj  to  take  away  Freckles  or  Spots 
in  the  Skin  or  Face  ;  and  to  drink  the  fame 
fwcetned  with  Sugar  for  all  the  purpofes  afore- 
faid. 

^cabiouS;,  three  forts. 

Hefenption. 

"  He  common  Field  Scabiom  groweth  up 
-*■  with  many  hairy  foftj  whitifh  green 
Leaves^  feme  whereof  are  but  very  little,  if  at 
all  jagged  on  the  edges,  others  very  much  rent 
and  torn  onlhe  fidesjand  have  threds  in  them, 
which  upon  the  breaking  may  be  plainly  fecn  - 
from  among  which  rife  up  divafe  haiiy  green 
Stalks  three  or  four  foot  high,  with  fuch  like 
hairy  green  Lea  vs  on  them,  but  more  deeply 
and  frhely  devided,  branched  forth  a  little  :  At 
the  tops  hereof  which  are  naked  and  bare  of 
Leaves  for  a  good  fpace,  fland  round  Heads  of 
Flowers,  of  a  pale  blewifh  colour ,  fee  together 
an  a  head, the  outermoft  wherof  are  larger  than 
the  inward,w^^many  threds  alfo  in  the  middle, 
fomwhat  flat  at  the  top, as  the  Head  with  Seed 
is  likewife :  The  Root  is  great,whitej&  thick 
growing  down  deep  into  the  ground,  and  abi- 
deth  many  yeersi 

There  is  another  fdrt  of  Field  Scabious,  dif¬ 
ferent  in  nothing  from  the  former,  but  only  it 
-  is  fmaller  in  all  refpeds. 

The  Corn  Scabious,  differcth  little  from 
the  firft,  but  that  it  is  greater  in  all  refpeds 
and  the  Flowers  more  declining  to  Purple ; 
Add  the  Root  creepeth  under  the  upper  cruft 
of  the  Earth,  and  runneth  not  deep  in  the 
ground  as  the  firft  doth. 

riate. 

The  firft  groweth  moft  ufually  in  Meadows, 
cfpecially  about  Lowdo;?  every  where. 

The  fecond  in  fome  of  the  dry  Fields  about 
this  City,  but  not  fo  plentiful  as  the  fprmer. 

The  third,  in  the  ftanding  Corn,  or  Fallow 
Fields,  and  the  borders  offuch  like  Fields.  • 
Tmc. 

They  Flower  in  J me  and  July,  ahi  fome 
abide  Flowring  until  it  be  late  in  Augujl,  and 
the  Seed  is  ripe  in  the  mean  time. 

There  are  many  other  forts  of  Scabious^  btit 
I  take  thofc  which  1  have  here  defetibed  to  be 
moft  familiar  with  us  j  The  vertucs  both  of 
thefe  and  the  reft  being  much  alike,  take  them 
as  followeth. 


Vertues  and  vfe. 

Scabious  is  very  effedual  forall  forts  of 
Coughs,  fhortnefs  of  iBrcath,  and  all  other  ^ 

Difeafesof  the  Ibreaft  and  Lungs,  ripeningJ®^*^^^^ 
and  digeftingcbld.  Flegm,  and  other  tough 
humors,  voiding  them  forth  by  Coughing  and 
fpitting  :  It-  ripencth  alfo  all  forts  of  inward 
Ulcers  and  Tmpoftumes,  thePlurlfie  alfo,  {£lnraard 
the  Decoftion  of  the  Herb  dry  or  green,  & 

made  with  W ine,  and  drunk  for  fome  time  to- 
gether  :  four  ounces  of  the  clarified  juyet 
Scabious  taken  in  the  morning  failing,  with  a 
.  dram  of  Mcthridate,  or  Venice  Treacl'e,freeth 
the  heart  from  ahy  infedlion  of  Peftilence,  if^^'^buncle 
after  the  taking  of  it, the  party  Iweat  two  hours 
in  their  Beds  j  and  this  Medidne  be  again ^ 
and  again  repeated  if  need  require  :  The  green  ‘’f 

Herb  bruifed  and  applied  to  any  Carbuncle  or 
Plague  fore,  is  found  by  certain  experience  to  ^'’^Pde  j 
diflolve  or  break  it  in  three  hours  (pace.  The 
fame  Decodlion  alfo  drunk,  hclpeth  the  pains  Riug- 
and  Stitches  in  thefides.  The  Decodlion 
the  Roots  taken  for  fourty  daies  together,  or  a  \ 
dram  of  the  Pouder  of  them  taken  at  a  time 
in  Whey,  doth  (as  <!Mathiolus  faith)  wonder- 
fully  help  thofe  that  are  troubled  with  running 
or  fpreading  Scabs,  Tetters,  or  Ringworms, 
yea  though  they  proceed  of  the  French 
which  he  faith  he  hath  tryed  by  experience  t  > 

Thejuyee  or  Decodlion  drunk,  helpcth  alfo 
Scabs  and  breakings  out  in  Itch  and 
Thejuyee  alfo  made  up  into  an  Oyntment 
and  ufcdj  is  eftedtual  for  the  fame  purpofe.  ^ 

The  fame  alfo  helpeth  all  inward  Wounds  by  ^^'^dnjj 
the  drying,  clenfing,  and  healing  quality  ther-^' 
in  :  A  Syrup  made  of  the  juyee  and  Sugar 
very  effeduail  to  all  the  purpofes  aforefaid.  ahd 
fo  is  the  diftilled  water  of  the  Herb  ahd  FfA  fores 
wers  made  in  due  feafoh  j  ei’pecially  to  be  ultid  ' 

when  the  green  Herb  is  not  in  force  to  be  la- 
ken.  The  Decodlion  of  the  Herb  <md  Ropts 
outwardly  applied,  doth  wonderfully  help  al  ^ 
forts  of  hard  or  cold  Swellings  in  any  part  of 
the  Body }  and  is  as  cffedlual  fot  any  ftirunk: 

Sinew  or  Vein.  -  The  Jiiyce  of  Scabiaus  made 
up  with  the  Poud'er  of  Borax  and  Carnphiie, 
clenfcth  the  Skin  of  the  Face  or  othef -part  of 
the  Body,  not  only  frorrr  Freckles  an4.  Pim¬ 
ples,  but  alfo  from  Morphewstnd  Lcpvy.  The’ 

Head  vvaflicd  with  the  fame  Decodlion,  clen-- 
,feth  it  from  Dandrif,  Scurf,  Sores  Itehe%/;.nJ  ' 
the  like,  being  ufed  Warm.  Tent^  alio  dipped 
•in  thejuyee  or  Water  thereof  net  only  hea- 
leth  all  green  Wounds,  but  old  Sores  and  Ul¬ 
cers  alfo  :  The  Herb  alfo  bruifed  and  applied 
doth  in  ftiort  time  loolen,  and  caufe  to  be 
drawn  forth  any  Splinter,  broken  bone.  Arrow 
head,  or  ocher  iuch  like  thing  lying  in  the 
Flefli. 


P  p 


Scurvy- 


2i8 


The  Englijh  ^hyjitian. 


Scurvy-grafs. 

Defcripthn^ 

AXv  ordinary  Englifti  Scurtiygra^  hath 

_ tnany  thick  fat  Leavs,  more  long  than 

broad,  and  fomtiraes  longer  and  narrower, 
fomtimcs  alfo  fmooth  on  the  edges,  and  fom- 
times  a  little  waved,  fomtimes  plain,  fmooth, 
and  pointed,  fomtimes  a  little  hollow  in  the 
jniddle  and  round  pointed,  of  a  fad  green,  and 
fomtimes  biownjfh  colour,  every  one  Itanding 
by  it  felf  upon  along  ¥ootftalk,''  which  is 
brownilh  or  gteenilb  alfo  *  from  among  which 
rife  Imal  {lender  Stalks,  bearing  a  few  Leaves 


andclcnfc,  but  the  Dutch  is  of 

better  cffeftjand  chiefly  ufed  fif  it  may  be  hadj 
by  thofe  that  have  the  Scurvey,  efpccially  to  Scurvy, 
purge  and  clenfc  the  Blood,  the  Liver,  and  the  Livtr  & 
Spleen,  for  all  which  Difeafes  it  is  of  Angular  Sfleen, 
good  effedl  by  taking  the  juyee  in  the  Spring 
every  morning  falling  in  a  cup  ©f  Drink : 

OUr  ordinary  Engiilti  bcurvygraji  natn  The  Decodion  is  good  for  the  fame  purpofe, 
many  thick  fat  Leavs,  m,ore  long  than  and  the  Herb  tunned  up  in  new  Drink,  either 

’  by  it  felf  or  with  other  things,  for  it  opencth 
Obftrudions,  evacuateth  cold  clammy  and 
Flcgmatick  Humors  both  from  the  Liver  and 
the  Spleen,  walling  and  confuming  both  the  _ 
fwelling  and  hardnefs  thereof,  and  thereby  ^  ~ 

bringing  to  the  Body  a  more  lively  colour-  ^ , 
Thejuyee  alfo  helpeth  all  foul  Ulcers  and-’j^^J  , 
Sores  in  the  Mouth,  if  it  be  often 

... _  -  t.  ,  therewith  j  and  ufed  outwardly,  elenfeth  the  . 

thereon  like  the  other,  but  longer  and  leiTer  j  Skin  from  fpots,  marks,  or  Scars,  that  happen  ,  gV- 
for  the  moll  part :  At  the  tops  whereof  grow  j  therein.  ' 

many  whicilh  Blowers,  with  yellow  threds  in 


the  middle,  Handing  about  a  green  head  which 
becometh  the  Seed  Veflel,  which  will  be.fom- 
y,hac  flat  when  it  is  ripe,  wherein  is  contained 
reddilh  Seed  tailing  fomwhat  hot :  The  Root 
is  made  of  many  white  firings,  which  flick 
deeply  in  the  mud,  wherein  it  chiefly  dcligh- 
teth :  yet  it  will  well  abide  in  the  more  upland 
and  dryer  grounds,  and  tafteth  a  little  brackifh 
or  Salt,  even  there,  but  not  fo  much  as  where 
at  hath  the  Salt  water  to  feed  upon. 

Vlace. 

It  groweth  all  along  the  Thames  fide,  both 
on  the  Efex  and  l^enujh  Shears,  from  ooL- 
Tvich  round  about  the  Sea  Coafts  to  Trover, 
Fo-rtsmouth,  and  even  to  where  it  is 

had  in  plenty:  The  other  with  round  Leavs 
groweth  in  the  Marfltes  in  UoUcind  in  Lin- 
celnfhire,  and  other  places  of  Lmcolnjhire  by 
tfic  Sea  fide. 

Vefcnptiea. 

There  is  alfo  another  fort  called  Dutch  Scur- 
vy-Cvafi,  which  is  moll  known  and  frequent 
in  Gardens,  which  hath  diverfe  frelh  green, 
and  almoft  round  Leaves  rifing  from  the 
Root,  nothing  fo  thick  as  the  former,  yet  in 
fotne  rich  ground,  very  large,  even  twice  fo 
big  as  in  others,  not  dented  about  the  edges, 
nor  hollow  in  the  middle,  everyone  Handing 
upon  a  long  BootHalk :  from  among  thefe  rife 
up  diVerf  long  {lender  weak  Stalks  higher  than 
the  former-,  and  with  more  white  Flowers  at 
the  tops  of  them,which  turn  into  fmaller  pods, 
and  finaller brownilh  Seed  than  the  former; 
The  Root  is  white,  final,  and  threddy  :  The 
taH  of  this  is  nothing  Salt  at  all,  but  hath  an 
hot  Aromatical  fpicy  tall. 

,  Time. 

They  Flower  in  April  or  May,  and  give 
their  Seed  ripe  quickly  after. 

Venues  and  Vfe. 

Tbd  Englilh  Scurvey-grafi  is  more  ufed  for 
the  Salt  tafl  it  bcarethjw‘^^  dosh  fomwhat  open 


Self-heal. 


. 


HTHe 


a  final!  low 
many  (mail 


Defeription. 
common  Self-heal  is 
creeping  Herb ,  having 
roundifti  pointed  Leavs  fomwhat  lika  the 
Leaves  of  Wild  Mints,  of  a  dark  green  colour 
without  any  dents  on  the  edges,  from  among 
which  rife  diverfe  fquare  hairy  Stalks  fcarce  z 
foot  high,  which  fpread  fomtimes  into  Bran¬ 
ches  with  diverfe  fuch  final  Leaves  fet  thereon, 
up  to  the  tops,  where  Hand  brown  fpiked. 

Heads,  of  many  final  brownifh  Leaves  like 
fcales  and  Flowers  fet  together,  almoft  like 
the  Head  of  Cajjidony,  which  Flowers  arc 
gaping,  and  of  a  blewifh  purple,  or  more  pale 
blew,  in  fome  places  fwcet,  but  not  fo  in  o- 
thers:  The  Root  confifts  of  many  firings  or 
fibres  downward,  and  fpreadeth  firings  alfo, 
whereby  it  encreafeth  :  The  final  ftalks  with 
the  Leaves  creeping  upon  the  ground,  Ihoot 
forth  fibres  taking  hold  of  the  ground,  wherby 
it  is  made  a  great  tuft  in  fhort  time. 

Flaxe. 

It  is  found  in  Woods  and  Fields  every 
where. 

Time. 

It  Flowreth  in  May,  and  fomtimes  in  .A- 
priL 

Venues  and  Vfe. 

As  Self-heal  is  like  Bugle  in  form,  fo  alfo 
in  the  Qualities  and  Vertues  ferying  for  al  the 
purpofes  whereto  Bugle  is  applied  with  good  ijfppard 
fuccefs  either  inwardly  or  outwardly,  for  in-  u'ouKds& 
ward  Wounds  or  Ulcers  wherefoever  Wnhan  '^Diceys, 
the  Body,  for  Bruifes  and  Falls  and  fuch  like  sruifis, 
hurts :  if  it  be  accompanied  with  Bugle, Sani- 
clc,  and  other  the  like  Wound  Herbs  it  will 
be  tlxe  more  effeflualj  and_to  walh  or  injeft 

into 


I 

ji 

fif 


t  15 

'4. 

J/' 


■  % 

■'1 

4 


'\ll 


5^ 


The  EngVtfl)  ^hyfitian. 


21^ 


into  Ulcers  in  the  parts  outwardly  where  there 
is  caufc  to  rcprels  the  beat  and  lharpnefs  of 
Humors  flowing  to  any  fore  Ulcer,  Inflamati- 
Tlu-xof  on,  Swelling  or  the  like,  or  to  fl:ay  the  Flux 
Blood  5  ofbloodinany  Woundor  Part,  this  is  ufed 
Tout  fores  good  fuccefs,  as  alfo  to  elenfe  the  foul- 
Creen  nefs  of  Sores,  and  caufe  them  more  fpcedily  to 
Tvounds be  healed.  It  is  an  efpecial  Remedy  for  all 
■  green  Wounds  to  foder  the  lips  of  them,  and 
to  keep  the  place  from  any  further  inconveni¬ 
ences  :  The  juyee  hereof  ufed  with  Oyl  of 
Rofes  to  anoint  the  Temples  and  Forehead, 
Headach ;  i»very  effectual  to  remove  the  Headach  :  and 
Sores  in  the  fame  mixed  with  Honey  of  Rofes,  denfeth 
the  Mouth  and  healcth  all  Ulcers  in  the  Mouth  and 
or  7  hr  oat  Th:  oat,  and  thofc  alfo  in  the  fccret  parts.  And 
&  fecret  the  Pioverb  of  the  Germans,  French,  and  o- 
farts,  thers  is  verified  in  this,  Thatbe  needetb  nei- 
thr  Phyfitian  nor  Chyrurpon,  that  hath  Self- 
heal  and  SznicU  to  help  himfelf>  , 

^  Here  is  another  Herb  of  Venus,  Self-heal 
i :  whereby  when  you  hurt,  you  may  heal  your 

felf,  ’tis  indeed  a  fpecial  Herb  for  inward  and 
outward  Wounds,  take  it  inwardly  in  Syrups 
for  inward  Wounds,  outwardly  in  Unguents 
and  Plaifters  for  outward. 


The  Service-tree. 

THis  is  fo  well  know  in  the  places  where  it 
grows  that  it  needeth  no  Defeription. 
Hime. 

It  Flowreth  before  the  end  of  May,  and  the 
Fruit  is  ripe  in  OSlober- 

Vertues  md  ufe. 


TlHxeh 


Services  when  they  arc  mellow  are  fit  to  be 
taken  to  flay  Fluxes,  Scowring,  ahd  Callings, 

sTowrinzs  Medlars :  if  they  be  dried  before 

ntellow,  and  kept  all  the  yecr,  they  may 
be  uled  in  Decoftlons  for  the  faid  purpofc, 
either  to  drink,  or  to  bath  the  parts  requiring 
Bleeding  is  profitably  ufed  in  that  manner  to 

of  wounds  bleeding  of  Wounds,  and  at  the 

Mouth  or  Nofc,  to  be  applied  to  the  Fore- 
&  bead  and  Nape  of  the  Neck. 

Smallage. 

'^HIs  alfo  is  very  well  known,  and  therefore 
I  (hall  nor  trouble  the  Reader  with  any 
Defaription  thereof. 

Vlace. 

It  groweth  naturally  in  wet  'and  Marfh 
grounds,  but  if  it  be  fown  in  Gardens  it  there 
prpfpereth  very  well. 


^Tmet 

It  abideth  green  all  the  Winter,  and  Seedeth 
in  Auguft. 

Vertues  and  Vfe. 

SniaUage  is  hotter,  dryer,  and  much  more 
McdicinabiethanParfley,  for  it  much  more 
openeth  Obftruftions  of  the  Liver  and  Spleen  . 
rarifieth  thick  Flegm,  andclcnfcth  it  and  the  K 
Blood  withal.  ,  It  provoketh  Urine  and  Wo-  ^ 

mens  Courfes,  and  is  fihgular  good  agairifi: 
the  yellow  Jaundice  j  It  is  very  cffcftual  a- 
gainft  Tertian  and  Quanan  Agues,  if  the 
Juyee  thereof  be  taken  J  but  cfpecially  made 
into  a  Syrup.  The  Juyee  alfo  put  to  Honey  ’ 
of  Rofes,  and  Barley  Water,  is  vercy  good  to 
Gargle  the  Mouth  and  Throat  of  thofe  that/®*'’^ 
have  Sores  and  Ulcers  in  them, and  will  quick-  Souths 
ly  heal  them  :  The  fame  Lotion  alfo  clenfcth  ^  throats 
and  hcaleth  all  other  foul  Ulcers  and  Cankers  '^^ters 
elfwhere  if  they  be  wafhed  therewith.  The  ^^fi^ers 
Seed  is  erpecially  ufed  to  break  and  expel 
wind,  to  kill  Worms  and  to  help  a  ftinkihg  worms 
Breath  :  The  Root  is  e|Feftual  to  all  the  puf-  ^^ul(ing 
pofes  aferefaid,  and  is  held  to  be  ftronger  in  ^teaih»  j 
operation  than  the  Herb,  but  efpccially  to  o- 
pen  Obftrudlions,  and  to  rid  away  an  Ague, 
ifthe  Juyee  thereof  be  taken  in  Wine,  or  the 
Decoction  thereof  in  Wine  be  ufed. 

Sopewort,  orBruife-  .  < 
wort. 

"Defeription. 

'J'He  Root  creepeth  under  ground  far  and 
n€er,with  many  Joynts  therein,of  a  broWn 
colour  on  the  outfide  and  yellowifh  Within  , 
fhooting  forth  in  diverfe  places  many  weak 
round  Stalks,  full  of  Joynts,  fet  with  two 
Leaves  apiece  at  every  one  of  them  on  the  ■  - 
contrary  fide,  which  are  ribbed  fomwhat  like 
unto  Plantane,  and  fafhioncd  like  the  com¬ 
mon  field  white  Campion  Leaves ,  feidom 
having  any  Branches  /rom  the  fides  of  the 
Stalks,  but  fet  with  diverfe  Flowers  at  the  top 
(landing  in  long  Husks  like  the  wild  Campi¬ 
ons,  made  of  five  Leavs  apiece,  round  at  the 
ends,  and  a  little  dented  in  the  middle,  of  a  ■ 

pale  Rofe  colour,  almoft  white,  fomtimes  dee¬ 
per,  and  fomtimes  paler,  of  a  reafonable  good 
feent. 

"Places 

It  groweth  wild  in  many  low  and  wet 
grounds  of  this  Land,  by  the  Brooks,  and  fideS 
I  of  running  Waters. 

Time. 

It  Flowreth  ufually  in and  fo  conti- 
nucth  all  Mugu-li,  and  part  of  September  be¬ 
fore  they  be  quite  Ipent. 

X 

P  p  i 


Vertues  ' 


210^ 


Tloe  Englijh  ^hyjimn- 


Cut  Fin¬ 
gers,  fro- 

"Vrine, 

F^x^els 

Gravel  & 

Stme, 

Vropfie^ 

French 

F{tx» 


V.  \ 


y ernes  and  ufi. 

-The  Country  people  in  diverfe  places  do 
ufe  to  bruife  the  Leaves  of  Sopewort,  and  lay 
it  to  their  Finders,  Hands,  or  Legs  when  they 
are  cut,  to  heal  them  up  again.  Some  make 
great  boaft  thereof  that  it  is  Diurctical  to  pro¬ 
voke  Urine,  and  thereby  to  expel  Gravel  and 
the  Stone  in  the  Reins  or  Kidneys :  and  do 
alfo  account  it;  lingular  good  to  avoid  H^ro- 
pical  waters  thereby  to.  cure  the  difeafe  of  the 
p.  opfie :  And  they  no  lefs  extol  it  to  perform 
an  abfolutc  cure  in  the  French  Pox,more  than 
either-  Sarfaparillai  Gujacum,  or  China  can 
doj  which  hew  true  it  is,  I  leave  to  others  to 
judg. 

Sorrel. 

OUr  ordinary  Som/,  which  groweth  in 
Gardens,  and  alfo  wild  in  the  Fields,  is 
fo  well  known  that  it  needeth  no  Deferipti- 


on. 


Venues  and  v[e> 


Cooleth 
Jnflama- 
tions,  & 
heat  ef 
Blood  3 
AgueSi 
.^Mnch 
tbirfty 
Frovo\e 
Appetite, 
J^iUworms 
Womens 
Courfes, 
Fluxes 
Toyfon 
Jaundice, 
Gravel  & 
■ftonc 
Blacli 
Jaundice, 
Inward 
ulcers  j 
Jtch,  Fet¬ 
ters  & 
King- 
worms 
K.ernels  in 
the  Throat 
fore  Mouth 
Jmpofiume 
Boy  I  or 
Plague 
fere. 


Sorrel  is  prevalent  in  all  hot  Difeafes,  to 
cool  any  Inflamation  and  heat  of  Blood  in 
Agues  Peftilential  or  Chollerick^  ot  other 

licknelies  and  fainting}  riling  from  heat,  arid 

to  refrelh  the  overljpent  Spirits  with  the  vio¬ 
lence  -  of  furiohs  of  fiery  fits  of  Agues,  to 
quench  Thirft,  and  procure  an  Appetite  in 
fainting  or  decayd  Stotnafehs :  for  it  rclifteth 
the  putrefaftion  of  the  Blood,  killeth  Worms, 
and  is  as  a  Cordial  to  the  heart  which  the 
Seeddoth  more  effedually  being  more  drying 
and  biiiding,  and  thereby  ftayeth  the  hot  Fiu- 
pccs  of  Womens  Courfes,  or  of  Humors  in  the 
Bloody  -Flux,  or  Fluxofthc  Stomach.  The 
Roots  alfo-in  aDccoitionj  or  in  Pouder,  is 
elFedtual  ifor  all  the  faid  purpofes.  Both  Roots 
and^c4,as,wella$thcHerbis  held  powerful 
to"rcGft[ -the;  poyfon  of  the  Scorpion.  The 
beco^ipnjPfthe  Roots, is  taken  to  , help  the 
Jaundice,  Sind  to  expel  Gravel  and  the  Stone 
m  the  Reins,  or  Kidneys.  The  Decodion  of 

the  Flowrets  made  with  Wine  and  drunk  hel- 
peih  the  fblsok  Jaundice,,,  as  alfo  the  inward 
Ulcers 6f (the, Body  or  Bowels.'  A  Syrup  made 
with  the  juyee  of  Stirrel  and  Fumitary  is  a  So^ 

ycvaign-help^to  kill  thofe  lharp  Humors  th^t 

caufe  the  itch.  The  Juyee  thereof  with  a.lit- 
tle  V  inegar  ferveth  well  tQ  be  ufed  outw ardly 
for  the  faruft  f^aufe,  and  -is ;  alfo  profitable  for 
Tetters,;  Rin§'^*?'^®^  It '  helpeth  alfo  to 
difculs  the  Kernels  in  the  Throat,  and  the 
Juyee  gargled  in  the  Mouth  helpeth  the  Sores 
thereii).  "The  Leaves  wrapped  up  in  a  <f  pic- 
woort  Leaf,  and  roafted  under  the  Embers, 
and  applied  to  a  hard  Impqftume,  BotchjBoj^l, 
or  Plague  Sore,  both  ripeneth  and  breaketh  it. 


The  DIftilled  water  of  the  Herb  is  of  much 
good  ufe  for  all  the  purpofes  ,aforefaid. 

Venus  ovyns  it,  and  Ihe  will  never  deny  the 
Herb  that  follows. 

Wood  Sorrel. 

Vefeription. 

THis  groweth  low  upon  the  ground,  ha¬ 
ving  a  number  of  Leaves  coming  from 
the  Root,  made  of  three  Leaves  like  aTrefoyl 
butfbroad  at  the  ends  and  tut  in  the  middle,  of 
a  faint  yellowifh  green  colour,  everyon^ftan- 
dingonalongFootftalk,  which  at  their  firft- 
coming  up  are  clofe  folded  together  to  the 
Stalk,  but  opening  themfelves  afterwards,  and 
are  of  a  fine  foyvr  rellifh,  and  yeelding  a  Juyee 
which  wili'tilrn  red  when  it  is  clarified,  and 
maketh  a  moft  dainty  cleat  Syrup :  Among 
the/e  Leavs  rifeth  up  diverfe  {lender  weak 
Footftalks,  with  every  one  of  them  a  Flower 
at  the  top,  confifting  of  five  fmall  pointed 
Leaves  Star  fafhion,of  a  white  colour  in  modi 
places,  and  in  fome  dafh’d  over  with  a  fmall 
fhew  of  blufb,  on  the  back  fide  only  :  After 
the  Flowers  are  paft  follow  fmal  round  heads, 
with  fmall  yellowifh.  Seed  in  them :  The 
Roots  are  nothing  but  fmal  firings  faftned  to 
the  end  of  a  fmal  long  piece,  allofthemjje- 
ing  of  a  yellowifh  colour.  .  *  ’ 

Place. 

It  groweth  in  many  places  of  our  Land,  in 
Woods  and  Wood  fides,  where  they  be  moifi: 
and  fliadowcd,  and  in  other  places  not  too 
much  open  to  the  Sun. 

Time. 

It  Flowreth  in  .April  and  .May. 

Venues  and  Vfe.  -  .  , ' 

Wood  Sorrel,  ferveth  to  all  purpofes  that  the 
other  Sorrel's  do,  and  is  more  effedf ual  in  hin-  •  ; 

dring  the  putrefaftion  of  Blood,  and  Ulcers  in  Vlctrs 
the  Mouth  and  Body,  and  in  cooling  and  temr  Jnjiamd-  ' 
pering  heats  8c  Inflamations,  to  quench  thirfi,  tions 
to  firengthen  a  weak  Stomach,  to  procure  an  procure 
appetite,  to  fiay  Vomiting,  and  Very  excellent  Appetite 
in  any  contagious  ficknefs  ,  or^  Pefiilential 
Feavers.  The  Syrup  made  of  the  Juyee  is  effe-  ting 
dual  in  all  the  caufes  afore  faid,  and  fo  is  the  Peftilenti- 
Difiilled  Watcr  of  the  Herb  alfo.  Spunges  or  nlFeavers 
Linnen  Cloathes  wet  in  the  Juyee  and  applied  Hot 
outwardly  to  any  hot  Swellings  or  InAamaii- fwellings 
ons,  doth  much  cool  and  help  them :  1  he  CanJier  or 
fame  Juyee  taken  and  gargled  in  the  Mouth,  ulcer  in 
and  after  it  is  fpit  forth,  frefh  taken,  doth  the  Mouth 
wonderfully  help  a  foul  fiinking  Canker,  wounds  or 
or  Ulcer  therein.  It  is  fingular  good  in  fcabs 
Wounds,Thrufis,  and  Stabs  in  the  Body,  to  Defuxi- 
ftay  bleeding,  and  to  clenfe  and  heal  the  ons. 
Wounds  fpeedilyj  and  helpeth  to  fiay  any  hot 
Defluxions  into  the  Throat  or  Lungs. 

Sow- 


The  Englijh  fhyjltian. 


zii 


Sow==ThiftIes. 

rpHefe  arc  generally  fo  well  known  that 
^  they  need  no  Defcription. 

Tlace^ 

They  grow  in  our  Gardens  and  manured 
Grounds  3  and  Tomtimes  by  old  Wallsj  the 
path  fides  of  fields  and  High-waies. 

Venues  and,  ufe» 

Sotv~tbi(iles  are  cooling  and  fomwhat  bin- 
Vains  &•  jngj  and  are  very  fit  to  cool  an  hot  Stomach, 
beat  of  the  ^nd  to  eafethe  gnawing  pains  thereof ;  The 
Stamaeby  Herb  boyled  in  Wine  is  very  helpful  to  ftay 
(ho'i't  wind  diflolutions  of  the  Stomach  :  And  the 
&  n  bet-  lyiiik  that  is  taken  ffom  the  Stalks  when  they 
,  are  broken,  given  in  drink,  is  beneficial  to 
Gravel  &  jjjofe  that  are  fhort  Winded  and  have  a  whec- 
Stone,  Pjj,  faith  that  it  hath  caufed  the 

flintiing  Gravel  and  Stone  to  be  voided  by  Urines  and 
B'leathy  that  the  eating  thereof  helpeth  a  flinking 
De- bi-eath  :  Three  fpoonfuls  of  the  juyee  thereof 

livery i  jgi-en  in  white  Wine  warmed,  and  fome  Oyl 

Strangury:,  put  thereto  caufeth  Women  in  Travel  to  have 
Milk  in~  fo  eafie  and  fpeedy  delivery,  that  they  may  be 
creajed,  able  to  walk  prefently  after:  The  laid  Juyee 
Veafmfi  taken  in  warm  drink,  helpeth  the  Strangury 
&  ftnging  and  pains  in  making  water.  ■* 
in  the  xhe  Decoftion  of  the  Leaves  and  Stalks, cau- 

E,arSi  feth  abundance  of  Milk  inMurfes,  and  their 
inflame  d  Children  to  be  well  coloured,  and  is  good  for 
thofe  whofe  Milk  doth  curdle  in  their  Breafts. 

tvhcals.  The  Juyee  boiled  or  throughly  heated  with  a 
&Blifters  little  Oyl  of  Bitter  Almonds  in  the  Pill  of  a 
Hemor-  Poinegranate,  and  dropped  into  the  Ears,  is  a 
rhoids,  furc  Remedy  for  Deafnefs,  fingings,  and  all 
Cleer  the  other  Difealcs  in  them.  The  Herb  bruifed  or 
Face»  the  Juyee  is  profitably  applied  to  all  hot  Infla- 
mations  in  the  Eyes,  or  wherefoever  ellc  ,  and 
for  Wheals,  Blifters,  or  other  the  like  erupti¬ 
ons  of  heat  in  the  Skin  j  as  alio  for  the  heat 
and  itching  of  the  Hemorrhoids,  and  the  heat 
and  fharpnels  of  Humors  in  the  Secret  parts 
of  man  or  Woman:  The  diftilled  water  of 
the  Herb,  is  not  only  effedual  for  all  the  Dif- 
cafes  aforefaid  to  be  taken  inwardly  with  alit- 
tlc  Su'^ar  (which  Medicine  the  daintiell  Sto¬ 
mach  will  not  ref  tile)  but  outwardly,  by  apply¬ 
ing  Cloathes  or  Spunges  wetted  therein  :  It 
is  wonderful  good  tor  Women  to  wafh  their 
'  Paces  therewith,  to  cleer  the  Skin,  and  give  a 

lullre  thereto. 


Southernwood. 

THis  is  fo  well  known  to  be  an  Ordinary 
Inhabitant  in  our  Gardens,  that  I 
fhall  not  need  to  trouble  you  with 
any  Defcription  thereof.  The  V crtucs  are  as 
followeth. 

Time. 

It  Plowreth  for  the  mofi:  part  in  July 
and  .Auguft. 

Venues  and  ufc. 

Diofeorides  faith,  That  the  Seed  bruifed, 
heated  in  warm  Water  &  drunk,  helpeth  thofe  Burfien, 
that  arc  Burften,  or  troubled  with  Cramps,  or  Cramps  & 
Convulfions  of  the  Sinews,  the  Sciatica,  ot  Convul- 
difficulty  in  making  water,and  bringeth  down  flons. 
Womens  Courfes.  The  fame  taken  in  Wine  Sciaticitj. 
is  an  Antidote  or  Counter  poyfon  againft  all  Strangury)' 
deadly  Poyfon,  and  4riveth  away  SexptntS)ivomens 
and  other  Venemous  Creatures  >  '  as  alfo  the  Courfes, 
fmelofthe  Herb  being  Burnt,  dQththe  Caine.  Poyfon) 
The  Oyl  thereof  anointed  on  the  Backbone  3 

before  the  Fits  of  Agues  come  tatteth  them  a-  inflamed 
way  :  it  taketh  away  Inflamatibns  ijn  the  Eyes,  Eyes, 
if  it  be  put  with  fome  part  of  a  rdafted  Quince  pimleS) 
and  boyled  with  a  few  crums  of  bread  and  ap-  Tuflhes  <d* 
plied.  Boyled  with  Barley  Meal  it  taketh  a-  whealSy . 
way  Pimples,  Pufhes,  or  Wheals,  tltat  rife  in  fverms, 
the  Pace  or  other  part  of  the  Body.  The  Seed  Splinters 
as  well  as  the  dried  Herb  is  often  given  to  kill  &ThornS) 
the  Worms  in  Children  ;  The  Herb  bruifed  OldV leers 
and  laid  to,  helpeth  to  draw  forth  Splinters,  Sores  hz 
and  Thorns  out  of  the  Plefh.  The  Aihes  the  Trivi~ 
thereofdryethupand  healcth  old  Ulcers  that 
are  without  Inflamation,  although  ’by  the  Baldnef, 
fharpnefs  thereof  it  biteth  fore  and  putteth  French 
them  to  fore  pains  :  as  alfo  the  Sores  in  the 
privy  Parts  of  man  or  woman.  The  Aflics  Stone, 
mingled  with  old  Sallet  Oyl,  helpeth  thofe  Spleen 
that  have  their  hair  fallen  and  are  bald,caufing  Mothtf.  ■ 
the  hair  to  grow  again  either  on  the  Head  or 
Beard.  VurantesiaXth,  That  the  Oyl  made 
of  Southernwood  and  put  among  the  Oynt- 
ments  that  are  ufed  againft  the  French  Difcaf, 
is  very  effcftual,  and  likewife  killeth  Lice  in 
the  Head.  The  Diftilled  Water  of  the  Herb 
is  faid  to  help  them  much  that  are  troubled 
with  the  Stone,  as  alfo  for  the  Difeafes  of  the 
Spleen  and  Mother.  The  Germans  commend 
it  for  a  fingular  Wound  Herb,  and  therefore 
call  it  Stabwort.  It  is  held  by  all^Writcrs, 

Antienc  and  Modern  to  be  more  oftenfive  tO 
the  ftomach  than  Wormwood- 


CLq 


Spigncl. 


11% 


The  Englijh  Thyjltian, 


Ttoifolies 

vHne  & 

womens 

Courps, 

Styahguryp 

pain  in  the 

flomach. 

Mother, 

Joynt 

aches  i 

Tough 

flegm,\ 

Fenemo^i'S 

Creatures. 


Spignel.  ^ 

.  Defcription- 

THe Roots  of  commen  %pignel  do.fpread 
much  and  deep  in  the  ground,  many 
firings  or  branches  groiwing  from  one  Head 
which  is  hairy  at  the  top,  of  a'blaeltifti  brown 
colour  on  the  omfidc  and  white  within,  fmel- 
ling  well,  and  of  an  Arbmatical  taft,  from 
wlience  rife  fundry  long  ftalks  of  moil  fine  cut 
Leaves  like  hairs,  finaller  than  Dill,  fet  thick 
on  both  fidcs  of  the  Stalks,  and  of  a  good 
feent.  Among  thefc  Leaves  rife  up  round  llif 
flalks,  .  with  few  Joynts  and  Leaves  at  them, 
and  at  the  tops  an  Umbel  of  fine  pure  white 
Flowers,  at  the  edges  wherdof  fomtimes  will 
be  feen  a  fhew  of  reddifh  blufh  colour,  cfpcci- 
ally  before  they  be  full  blown,  and  are  fuccee- 
ded  by  final  fomwhat  round  Seed,  bigger  than 
the  ordinary  Fennel, and  of  a  browner  colour, 
devided  into  two  parts,  and  crefted  on  the 
back,  as  moft  of  the  Umbelliferous  Seeds 
are. 

‘  Tlace. 

It  groweth  wild  inLancaJhire,T  or^[&/>e,and 
other  Northern  Countries,and  is  alfo  planted 
in  Gardens. 

Venues  and  Vfe. 

Galen  faith,  The  Roots  of  Spignel  are  a- 
vailable  to  provoke  Urine  and  Womans  Cour- 
fesj  but  if  too  much  thereof  be  taken  it  cau- 
feth  Headaeh :  The  Roots  boyled  in  Wine  or 
Water  and  drunk,  helpeth  the  Strangury,  and 
ftoppings  of  the  Urine,  the  Wind,  fwellings 
and  pains  in  the  Stomach,  pains  of  the  Mo¬ 
ther,  and  all  Joynt  Aches.  If  the  Pouder  of 
the  Roots  be  mixed  with  Honey,and  the  fame 
taken  as  a  licking  Medicine,  it  breaketh  tough 
Flegm,  and  drieth  up  the  Rhewm  that  falleth 
on  the  Lungs.  The  Roots  are  accounted  ve¬ 
ry  effeftual  againft.  the  flinging  or  biting  of 
any  Venemdus  Creature,  and  is  one  of  the 
Ingredients  in  Methridate,  and  other  Anti¬ 
dotes  for  the  fame, 

'I?  ^  ^  ^  c  ^  ^1?  '1^  •I'  ^ 

Spleenwort,  or  Cete< 
rack.  , 

Defcriptibn.  • 

T  '  He  fmooth  SpUenwort  from  a  black, 
threddy  and  bufliy  Root,  fendeth  forth 
many  long  finglc  Leaves,  cut  in  on  both  fides 
into  round  dents,  almoft  to  the  middle,  which 
is  not  fo  hard  as  that  of  Pollipodie,  each  devi- 
fion  being  not  al wales  fet  oppofite  unto  the  o- 
ther,  but  between  each,  fmooth,  and  of  a  light 


green  on  the  upper  fide,  and  a  dark  yellowifh 
roughnefs  on  the  back,folding  or  rolling  it  felf 
inward  at  the  firfl  fpvinging  up. 

Place. 

It  groweth  as  wedl  upon  flonc  walls  as  moift 
and  fhadowy  "places  about  Briftol  and  other 
the  Weft  parts  plentifully  3  as  alfo  on  Fra¬ 
mingham  Caftle,  on  Becl^ons field  Church  in 
Barf;fi}ire,atStroT»de  in  Kent,  and  elfwbere, 
and  abideth  green  all  the  Winter. 

Vertiics  and  Vfe. 

It  is  generally  ufed  againft  infirmities  of 
the  Spleen,'  it  helpeth  the  ftrangury  and  wa- 
fteth  the  Stone  in  the  Bladder,  and  is  good  a- 
gainft  the  yellow  Jaundice  and  the  Hiccoggh3 
but  the  ufe  of  it  in  Women  hindreth  Concep¬ 
tion.  M athiolits  hkh,  That  if  a  dram  of  the 
duft  that  is  on  the  back  fide  of  the  Leaves,  be 
mixed  with  half  a  dram  of  Amber  in  Poiider, 
and  taken  with  thejuyee  of  Purflane  or  Plan- 
tane,  it  will  help  the  running  of  the  Reins 
fpeedily,  and  that  the  Herb  and  Root  being 
boyled  and  taken,  helpeth  all  Melancjiollick 
Difeafes,  and  thofe  efpecially  that  arife  from 
the  French  Difeafe.  Carnerarim  faith.  That 
the  Diftilled  water  thereof  being  drunk  is  very 
efFedual  againft  the  Stone  in  the  Reins  and 
Bladder  :  and  that  the  Ly  that  is  made  of  the 
Afhes  thereof  being  drunk  for  fome  time  to¬ 
gether,  helpeth  Splenetick  perfons  :  It  is  ufed 
in  outward  Remedies  for  the  fame  purpofe. 

Star^thillle. 

Defeription. 

THe  commonStar-thi(ile  hath  diverfe  long 
and  narrow  Leaves  lying  next  the 
ground,  cut  or  torn  on  the  edges,  fomwhat 
deeply,  into  many  almoft  even  parts,  foft  or  a 
little  Woolley  all  over  the  green,  among 
which  rife  up  diverfe  weak  ftalks  parted  into 
many  Branches  all  lying,  or  leaning  down  to 
the  ground,  that  i:  feemeth  a  pretty  Bufti,  fet 
with  diverfe  the  like  devided  Leaves  up  to  the 
tops  ,  where  feverally  do  Hand  long  and  fmall 
whitifti  green  heads,  fet  with  very  {harp  and 
long  white  pricks  (no  part  of  the  Plant  being 
elfe  prickly)  which  are  fomwhat  yellowjfh : 
out  of  the  middle  whereof  rifeth  the  Flower 
compofed  of  many  fmall  reddifti  purple  threds; 
and  in  the  Heads  after  the  Flowers  arc  paft, 
come  fmall  whitifti  round  Seed  lying  in  down, 
as  others  do.  The  Root  is  fmall,  long,  and 
woody,  perilhing  every  ycer,  and  rifing  again 
of  its  ownfowing. 

Tlace. 

It  groweth  wild  in  the  Ficlds"^aboi:t  J  ordnn 
in  many  places,  as  at  Mile-rnd  Gncny  in 
Finsbury  Fields  beyond  the  V\  ind-mils,  and 
many  other  places. 


Spleen, 

ftrangury 

fione, 

yellow 

JaurJice 

Running 

of  the 

Reins, 

Mcfan- 

choUy 

Difeafes. 


Tl?e  EngUp?  Thyptian, 


Vro’vdkes 

Vr'mc, 

fionc, 

flagucy 

french  fox 
ohlttu- 
ft'onS) 
Agues. 


Time, 

It  Flowveth  early,  and  Scedeth  in  y«/y,and 
fomtimes  in  Au^ufi. 

Vert  lies  and.  Ufe. 

The  Seed  of  this  Star-thifile  made  into 
Ponder  and  drunk  in  Wine,  provoketh  Urine, 
and  lidpeth  to  break  the  Stone,  and  drive  it 
forth.  Tire  Root  in  Pouder  and  given  in 
Wine  and  drunkjis  good  againft  the  Plague  or 
Peftilence,  and  drunk  in  the  mornings  fafting 
for  fome  time  together,  is  very  profitable  for 
a  Fiftula  in  any  part  of  the  Body.  Baptifta. 
Sardiis  doth  much  commend  the  diftilled  Wa¬ 
ter  hereof  being  drunki  to  help  the  French 
Difeafe,  to  open  Obftrudfions  of  the  , Liver, 
and  clenfe  the  Blood  from  corrupted  Humors, 
and  is  profitably  given  againft  Quotidian  or 
Tertian  Agues. 

Strawberries. 


'  I  Hefe  arc  fo  well  known  through  this 
Land,  that  they  need  no  Defeription. 

Time. 

They  Flower  in  May  ordinarily,  and  the 
Fruit  is  ripe  fliortly  after. 

Venues  and  Ufe, , 

Strareberries  when  they  are  green,  are  cold 
Ceol  the  and  dry,  but  when  they  are  ripe jihey  are  cold 
Liver  and  moift  •  The  Berries  are  excellent  good  to 
^icen’i  &  ^ool  the  Liver, the  Blood  and  the  Spleen,oran 
ttomach  Chollcrick  ftomach,  to  reftelh  &  comfort 

Quench  fainting  SpiritS3&  to  quenchThirft;  They 
nirfi-,  are  good  alfo  for  otlier  Inflamations,  yet  it  is 
not  amifs  to  refrain  them  in  a  Leaver,  left  by 
their  putrefying  in  the  Stomach  they  encreafe 
Frovo}(e  Fits.  The  Leavs  and  Roots  boyled  in 
Vrine,  Wine  and  Water  and  drunk,  do  likewife  cool 
flay  the  Liver  and  Blood,  and  aflwage  all  Inflama- 
Jiloody  tlons  in  the  Reins  and  bladder,  provoketh  U- 
fiux  &  tine,  and  allaycth  the  heat  and  Iharpnefsthere- 
iromcns  •  "^he  fame  alfo  being  drunk  ftayeth  the 
CoiirfcSy  Bloody  Flux,  and  Womens  Courfes,  and  hel- 
peth  the  Swellings  of  the  Spleen.  The  Wa- 
the  heart  ter  of  the  Berries  carefully  diftilled  is‘a  Sove- 
Tellovp  I'aigf'  Remedy  and  Cordial  in  the  panting  and 
Beating  of  the  Heart,  and  is  good  for  the  yel- 
'Ulcers,  low  Jaundice.  The  juyee  dropped  into  foul 
Ulcers,  or  they  wafhed  therewith,  or  the  De- 
Mouths  coftion  of  the  Herb  and  Root,  doth  wonder- 
or  Ulcers  fully  clenfe,  and  help  to  cure  them.  Lotions 
jyi  fhc  and  Gargles  for  fore  Mouthes,  or  Ulcers  ther- 
pf mines  in,  or  in  the  privy  Parts, or  elfwhere, are  made 
the  Leaves  and  Roots  hereof  j  which  is 
Catarrhs  alfo^good  to  fallen  loofe  Teeth,  and  to  heal 
CT  Di’fii-  iBul  Gums:  It  hclpeth  alfo  to  flay 

xions  Catarrhs  or  Defluxions  qf  Rhewm  into 
Inflamed  the  Mouth ,  Throat,  Teeth,  or  Eyes  j 
The  juyee  or  Water  is  lingular  good  for  hot 
and  red  Inflamed  Eyes,  if  dropped  into  them. 


or  they  bathed  therewith  3  it  is  alfo  of  excel¬ 
lent  property  for  all  Pufhes,  Wheals, and  other  piSes  & 
breakings  forth  of  hot  &  fharp  Humors  in  the  wheals 
Face  and  Hands,  or  other  parts  .of  the  Body,  fxcey 

tQ  bath  them  therewith  j  and  to  take  away  a-  Veformi- 
ny  rednefs  in  the  Face,  or  Spots,  or  other  De-  ties  in  the 
formitics  in  the  Skin,  and  to  make  it, deer  and  sltiriy 
fmooth.  Some  ufe  this  Medicine,  Take  fd' films  over 
many  Strawberries  as  you  (hall  think  fitting,  the  Eyts. 
and  put  them  into  a  Diftillatory  or  body  of 
Glafs  fit  for  them,  which  being  well  clofed,  fet 
it  in  a  bed  of  Horfdung  for  twelve  or  fourteen 
dales,  and  afterwards  diftill  it  carefully  and 
keep  it  for  your  ufe :  It  is  an  excellent  water^ 
for  hot  inflamed  Eyes,  and  to  take  away  any  '*' 
film  or  Skin  that  beginneth  to .  grow  over 
them,  and  for  ftxh  other  defeds  in  them  as 
may  be  helped  by  any  outward  Medicine. 

Venus  owns  the  Herb. 

Succory. 

Veferiptim, 

THe  Garden  Succory  hath  longer  and  nar¬ 
rower  Leaves  than  Endivcy  and  more  cut 
in  or  torn  on  the  edges,  and  the  R®ot.abidcth 
naany  yeers :  It  beateth  alfo  blcw  Flowers 
like  Endive,  and  the  Seed  is  hardly  diftingufo 
flicd  from  the  Seed  of  the  fmooth  or  ordinary 
Endive. 

The  wild  Succory  hath  diverfe  long  Leaves 
lying  on  the  ground  verv  much  cut  in  or  torn 
on  the  edges,  on  both  fides  even  to  the  middle 
rib  ending  in  a  point  j  fomtimes  it  hath  a  red 
Rib  down  the  middle  of  the  Leaves,  from  a- 
mong  which  rifeth  up  a  hard,  round,  woody 
ftalk  Ipreading  into  many  Branches,  fet  with 
fmaller  and  lefler  devided  Leaves  on  them  up 
to  the  tops  where  ftand  the  Flowers,  which  are 
like  the  Garden  kind  as  the  Seed  is  alfo  (only 
take  notice  that  the  Flowers  of  the  Garden 
kind  are  gone  in  one  Sunny  day,  they  being 
fo  cold  that  they  are  not  able  to  endure  the 
Beams  of  the  Sun  J  and  therfore  moft  delight 
in  the  fhadow.)  The  Root  is  white,  but  more 
hard  and  woody  than  the  Garden  kind  :  The 
whol  Plant  is  exceeding  bitter. 

Peace . 

This  groweth  in  many  places  of  our  Land, 
in  waft,  untilled,  and  barren  Fields.  Theo- 
ther  only  in  Gardens.  ChoUericlf: 

Venues  and  Vfc.  &  flegma- 

Garicn  Succory  as  it  is  more  dry,  and  lefstic^Hw- 
cold  than  Endive,  fo  it  openeth  more  *  An  mors, 
handful  of  the  Leavs  or  Roots  boyled  inWine  Obftru^ 
or  Water,  and  a  draught  thereof  drunk  fermions, 
ftingjdriveth  forth  Chollerick  and  Flegjnatick  Tellow 
Humors  j  openeth  Obftruftions  of  the  Liver  Jaundice, 
Gall,  and  Spleen,  heipcth  the  yellow  Jaun-  Hot  Reins 
dice,  the  Heat  of  the  Reins  and  of  the  Unn,&z/rine, 
Q-q  i  the 


224 


The  Englijh  Thyjitian. 


Vropfiej 


Aguesj 


fajjions  of 
the  Heart} 
Headach, 
SroeUiws 

o 

&  Infla- 
mations, 
Sf.  Antho¬ 
nies  fires } 
fufhesy 
Tvheals  & 
pimples } 
Inflamed 
EyeS} 

'Too  mitch 
Milk^ 


Tottsh 


the  Dropfie  alfo,  andthofe  that  have  an  evil 
difpohtion  in  their  Bodies  by  reafon  of  long 
ficknefs,  evil  Diet  &c.  which  the  Greeks  call 
Cachexia.  A  Decoaion  thereof 
inad«  with  Wine  and  drunk,  is  very  cftcaual 
againft  long  lingring  Agues  :  and  a  dram  of 
the  Seed  in  Pouder  drunk  in  Wine  before  the 
Fit  of  an  Ague,  helpeth  to  drive  it  away  :  The 
Diftilkd  Water  of  the  Herb  and  Flowers  (if 
you  can  take  them  in  time)  hath  the  proper¬ 
ties,  and  is  efpecial  good  for  h6t  Storaachs,and 
in  Agues,  either  Peftilential  or  of  long  con¬ 
tinuance,  for  fwounings  and  Paflions  of  the 
Heart,  for  the  heat  and  Headach  in  Children, 
and  to  the  blood  and  Liver.  The  faid  water 
or  the  juyee,  or  the  bruifed  Leaves  applied 
outwardly,  allayeth  Swellings,  Inflamations, 
St.  Anthonies  Fire,  Pufhes,  Wheals, and  Pim¬ 
ples,  efpeciallyufed  with  a  little  Vinegar,  as 
alfo  to  wafti  peftiferous  Sores.  ThefaidWa- 
tcr  is  very  effedtual  for  fore  Lyes  that  are  in¬ 
flamed  with  rednefs,  and  for  Nurfes  Breafls 
that  are  pained  by  the  abundance  of  Milk. 

The  wild  Succory  as  it  is  more  bitter,  fo  it  is 
more  ftrengthning  to  the  Stomach  and  Liver. 

Englifii  Tobacco. 

Vefcriptien. 

THis  rifeth  up  with  a  thick  round 
Stalk  about  two  foot  high,  where¬ 
on  do  grow  thick  fat  green  Leaves, 
nothing  fo  large  as  the  other  Indi¬ 
an  kinds,  fomwhat  round  pointed  alfo,  and 
nothing  dented  about  the  edges  t  The  Stalk 
brancheth  forth,  and  beareth  at  the  tops  diverf 
Flowers  fet  in  green  Husks,  like  the  other 
but  nothing  fo  large,  fcarce  flanding  above 
the  Brims  of  the  Husks,  round  pointed  alfo, 
and  of  a  greenifh  yellow  colour.  The  Seed 
that  followeth  is  not  fo  bright,but  larger,  con¬ 
tained  in  the  like  great  Heads.  The  Roots  are 
neither  fo  great,  nor  woody,  and  pcrifhing  e- 
very  yeer  with  the  hard  Frofts  in  Winter,  bur 
rifeth  generally  of  its  own  fowing. 

Tlace. 

This  came  from  fome  parts  of  BraJJiile  as  is 
thought,  and  is  more  familier  to  our  Country, 
than  any  of  the  other  forts,  early  giving  ripe 
Seed,  which  the  others  feldom  do. 

Time. 

It  Flowreth  from  J»??efomtime$  to  the  end 
of  Augufi}  or  later,  and  the  Seed  ripeneth  in 
i-he  meantime. 

Vertues  and  vfe. 

It  is  found  by  good  experience  to  be  avai¬ 
lable  to  expectorate  tough  Flcgm  from  the 
Stomach,  Cheft,  and  Lungs:  The  juyee 
nirtficof  made  into  a  Syrup,  or  the  diflilkd  wa- 


or 


tef  of  the  Herb  drunk  with  fome  Sugar, 
without  if  you  will :  Or  the  fmoke  taken  by 
-a  Pipe  as  is  ufual,  but  failing.  The  fame  hel- 
peth  to  expel  Worms  in  the  Stomach  and  Bel¬ 
ly,  and  to  cafe  the  pains  in  the  Head  or  Mea- 
grim,  and  the  griping  pains  in  the  Bowels :  It 
is  profitable  for  thofe  that  are  troubled  with 
the  Stone  in  the  Kidneys,  both  to  eafe  pains 
and  by  provoking  Urine  to  expel  Gravel  and 
the  Stone  ingendred  therein,  and  hath  been 
found  very  efieClual  to  expd  windinefs  and  o 
ther  Humors  which  caufe  the  flrangling  of  the 
Mother  :  The  Seed  hereof  is  very  efteClual  to 
help  the  Toothach,and  the  Allies  of  the  burnt 
Herb,  to  clenfe  the  Gums,and  make  the  Teeth 
white.  The  Herb  bruifed  and  applied  to  the 
place  grieved  with  the  Kings  Evil  (as  they  call 
it)  helpeth  it  in  nine  or  ten  daics  effeClually  t 
CMonardus  faith  it  is  a  Counter-poyfon  for  the 
biting  of  any  Venemous  Creature  j  the  Herb 
alfo  being  outwardly  applied  te  the  hurt  place; 
The  diftilled  water  is  olten  given  with  fome 
Sugar  before  the  Fit  of  an  Ague  to  leffen 
them,  and  take  them  away  in  three  or  four 
times  ufing.  If  the  Diftilled  fieces  of  the 
Herb  having  been  bruifed  before  the  Diftilla- 
tion,and  not  diftilled  dry  be  fet  in  warm  dung 
for  fourteen  dales,  and  afterwards  hung  up  in 
a  Bag  in  a  Wine  Celler  j  that  liquor  t flat  di- 
ftillcth  therefrom  is  fingular  good  to  ufc  for 
Cramps,  Aches,'the  Gout,  and  Sciatica,  and 
to  heal  Itches^  Stabs,  and  running  Ulcers, 
Cankers,  and  foul  Sores  whatfoever :  The 
Juyee  is  alfo  good  for  all  the  faid  griefs,  and 
likewife  to  kill  Lice  in  Childrens  Heads. 
The  green  Herb  bruifed  and  applied  to  any 
green  Wound,  cureth  any  frefli  Wound  or  cut 
wherfoever  :  and  the  Juyee  put  into  old  Sores 
both  clenfeth  and  healeth  them*  There  is  alfo 
made  hereof  a  fingular  good  Salve  to  help  Im- 
poftumes,  hard  T,  umors,  and  other  fwellings 
by  blows  or  falls. 

Tlie  Tamarisk-Tree. 


THis  is  fo  well  known  in  the  pi  aces  where  it 
grows  chat  it  needeth  no  Defeription. 

Time. 

ItFlowrcth  about  the  end  of  May^oc  injumt 
and  theSecd  is  ripe  and  blown  away  in  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  Scpft'w^e/. 

f^ertues  and  ufc. 

If  the  Root,  Leaves,  or  yong  Branches  be  Spleen, 
boyled  in  Wine  or  Vinegar  and  drunk,  and  Hcmerr- 
applied  outwardly,  it  is  very  powerful  againft  rhoids, 
thchardnefsofthefpleen.  The  Leaves  boyled  flitting 
in  Wine  and  drunk  is  good  to  ftay  the  bleeding  Blood, 
of  the  Hemorrhoidal  Veins,  the  (pitting  ot  womens 
Blood,  and  Womens  too  abounding  Courfes,  Coiirfes, 
and  helpeth  the  Jaundice,  the  Chollick,  and  Jaundice, 

the  ei'Chollicl;^ 


worms, 
^eagrim, 
pains  in 
the  Bo¬ 
wels 

Gravel^ 

Stone, 

wind. 

Mother, 

toothacb. 

Kings  E- 

vil, 

Venemous 
Creature, 
Mgue, 
Cramps  df" 
.Aches, 
Sciatica, 
luh,Scabs 
&  Vlcers, 
Cankers 
&  foul 
S ores. 
Lice, 

Frefh  ' 
wound. 
Old  fores, 
Impefiums 
&  hard 
SweUimj. 


/■ 


Vencmous' 

SerpentSi 


T  oothach. 
Pain  in 
the  Ears, 
vaatering 
Eyes, 

C  anrienes 

&  vlcers, 

Nks  & 

Lice, 

Spleen,  ; 

Burning 

&  Sed- 

ding, 

French 

P0X3 

Lepyy  & 

Scabs, 

Dropfie, 

Melon- 

choUy, 

Blac\ 

Jaundice. 


Difury, 

Strangwp, 

Rms, 

Fjdneys, 

roind, 

h’emb, 

Mifcar- 

Xiage, 


Stone, 

Stomach, 

norms. 

Cramps. 


thebhingsofall  Venemous  Serpents,  except 
the  Afp.  The  Bark  is  as  efFedual  if  not  more 
to  all  the  purpofes  aforefaid  j  and  both  it  and 
the  Leaves  boyled  in  Wine,  and  the  Mouth 
and  Teeth  wafhed  therewith  hclpeth  the 
Toothachj  bcin^  dropped  into  the  Ears  ea- 
feth  the  pains,  and  is  good  for  therednefs  and 
watering  of  the  Eyes.  The  faid  Dccoftion 
with  fomc  Honey  put  thereto  is  good  to  flay 
Gangrenes  and  fretting  Ulcers,  and  to  walh 
thofe  that  are  fubjed  to  Nits  and  Lice.  The 
Wood  is  very  efPcdual  to  confume  the  Spleen, 
and  therefore  to  drink  out  of  Cups  and  Cans 
made  thereof  is  good  for  Splenctick  perfons. 
The  Aflies  of  the  Wood  are  ufed  for  all  the 
purpofes  aforefaid,  and  befides  doth  cjuickly 
help  the  Blifters  raifed  by  Burnings  or  ScaT 
,  dings,  by  fire  or  water.  .Alpirm  and  Feflin- 
gm  do  affirm.  That  the  oEgyptians  do  with 
as  good  fuccefs  ufethe  Wood  hereof  to  cure 
the  French  Difeafe,  as  others  do  Lignum  Vitte, 
or  Gujacum ,  and  give  it  alfo  to  fuch  as  are 
poffefled  with  Lepry,  Scabs,  Puffies,  Ulcers, 
or  the  like,  and  is  available  alfo  to  help  the 
Dropfie,  arifing  from  the  hardnefs  and  Ob- 
flrudlionofthe  Spleen,  as  alfo  for  Mclanchol- 
ly,  and  the  black  Jaundice  that  arileth  there¬ 
of, 

^  ^  ^  'I?  •  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^ 

Garden  Taofie. 

His  alfo  is  fo  well  known,  that  it  nee- 

deth  no  Defeription. 

Time. 

It  Llowrcth  in  June  and  July, 

Vertues  and  Vfe. 

Thee  Dccoftioh  of  the  common  Tanfie,or 
the  juyee  drunk  in  Wine  is  a  lingular  Reme¬ 
dy  for  all  the  griefs  that  come  by  flopping  of 
the  Urine,  helpeth  the  Strangury  and  thofe 
that  have  weak  Reins  and  Kidneys  :  It  is  alfo 
very  profitable  to  diffolve  and  expel  Wind  in 
the  Stomach,  Belly,  or  Bowels,  to  procure 
Womens  Courfes,  and  expel  windinefs  in  the 
Matrix.  If  it  be  bruifed  and  often  fmelled  un¬ 
to,  as  alfo  applied  to  the  lower  part  of  the 
Belly,  it  is  very  profitable  for, fuch  Women  as 
are  given  to  mifearry  in  Childbearing,  to  cauf 
them  to  go  out  their  full  time  :  It  is  ufed  alfo 
againll  the  Stone  in  the  Reins,  cfpecially  to 
men.  The  Herb  fried  with  E^gs  (as  is  accu- 
flomed  in'the  Spring  time)  which  is  called  a 
Tanfie,  helpeth  to  digcfl,and  carry  downward 
thofe  bad  Humors  that  trouble  the  Stomach  ; 
The  Seed  is  very  profitably  given  to  Children 
for  the  Worms,  and  the  Juyee  in  Drink  is  as 
effedlual.  Being  boyled  in  Oyl  it  is  good  for 
the  finews-ffirunk  by  Cramps,  or  pained  with 
cold,  if  thereto  applied. 

Dame  Fenus  was  minded  to  pleafui;e  Wo¬ 


men  with  Child  by  this  Herb,  for  there  grows 
not  an  Herb  fitter  for  their  ufes  than  this  is,  it 
is  jufl  as  though  it  were  cut  out  for  the  pur* 
pefis,  the  Herb  bruifed  and  applied  to  the 
Navil  flaies  mifearriage,  I  know  no  Herb  like 
it  for  that  ufe  J  boyled  in  ordinary  Beer,  and 
the  Decodion  drank,  doth  the  like,  and  if  bee 
Womb  be  not  as  ffie  would  have,  this  Dcco- 
dion  will  make  it  as  ffie  would  have  it,  or  at 
Icaft  as  ffie  ffiould  have  it  j  let  thofe  Women 
that  delire  Children  love' this  Herb,  ’tis  theic 
beft  Companion,  their  Husband  excepted. 

Alfo  it  confumes  the  Flegmatick  Humors,  the 
cold  and  moifl  couflitution  of  Winter  moft 
ufually  infeds  the  Body  of  Man  with,and  that 
was  the  firft  reafon  of  eating  Tanfies  in  the 
Spring,  at  lafl  the  world  being  over  run  with 
Popery,  a  Monfler  called  Super (tkion  perks 
up  his  head,  and  as  a  juft  Judgment  of  God 
obfeures  the  bright  beams  of  Kncwledg  by  his 
difmal  looks  (Pyfitians  feeing  the  Pope  and 
his  Imps  felfiffi  they  began  to  be  fo  too)  and 
now  forfooth  Tanfies  muft  be  eaten  only  on 
Palm  and  Eafter  Sundaies,  and  their  neighjot 
daics  3  as  laft  Superftion  being  too  hoc  to 
hold,  and  the  felfiffincfs  of  PhyfitianS  walking 
in  the  clouds,  after  the  Fryars  and  Monks  had 
made  the  people  ignorant,  the  Superftion  of 
the  time  was  found  out,  but  the  Vertue  of 
the  Herb  hidden,  and  now  ’tis  dmoft,  if  not 
altogether,  left  off ;  Surely  our  Phyfitians  are 
beholding  to  none  fo  much  as  they  are  to 
Monks  and  Fryars,  for  want  of  eating  this 
Herb  in  Spring,  make  people  fickly  in  Sum¬ 
mer,  and  that  makes  work  for,  the  Phyfttian. 

If  it  be  againft  any  man  or  womans  Confei- 
er.ee  to  eat  a  Tanfie  in  the  Spring,  I  am  atuiv- 
willing  to  burden  their  confciences  as  I  am 
that  they  ffiould  burden  mine,  they  may  boyl 
it  in  W ine  and  drink  the  Dceo^ion,  it  will 
work  the  fame  effect. 

4“  ^  *1’ ^  ^  ^  ^ :  4?  4?  4?  ^  ^  4?  ^ 

V  V ild  Tanfie j  or  Silver^ 
weed. 

'^His  alfo  is  fo  well  known  that  it  needeth 
no  Defeription. 

Place, 

It  groweth  almoft  in  every  place. 

Time. 

It  Flowreth  in  June  and/«/y- 
Vertues  and  ufe. 

r<twJ?eftaycththeLask,  and  all  Fluxes  flux, 
of  Blood  in  men  or  women,  which  fome  fay  it 
will  do  if  the  green  Herb  be  worn  in  the  Terms, 
ffioos,  fo  k  be  next  the  Skin,  and  ’tis  true  c-  ft  ops, 
nough  that  ’twil  ftop  the  Terms  if  worn  fo,  ^pitting 
and  the  Whites  too  tor'ought  I  know.  It  ftay-  ^ omiting 
eth  alfo  fpitting  or  Vomiting  of  Blood.  The  *>f  Blood, 
R  r  Poudev 


226 


Simhwc- 
nmg 


Poudei-  of  the  dried  Herb  taken  in  feme  of  the 
whkesy  diftilied  Water  helpeth  the  Whites  in  women. 

Ruptures y  but  more  cfpecially  if  a  little  Coral  and  Ivory  ^ 
Belly -achi  in  Ponder  be  put  to  it :  It  is  alfo  much  com- 
Sciciticu^  niendeci  to  help  Children  that  arc  biulicnjand 
Joints,  have  a  Rupture  being  boyled  in  Water  and 
toothach,  Saif  Being  boyled  in  Wine  and  drunk,  it 
Boef  teeth  eafeth  the  griping  pains  of  the  Bowels, 

CumS)  good  for  the  Sciatica  and  Joynt  Aches.  The 

'Ulcers  ht  fame  boyled  in  Vinegar  with  Honey  and  Al- 
the  Mouth  lufn,  and  gargled  in  the  Mouth,  eafeth  the 
yoQundsi  pains  of  the  T ooihach,  faflneth  loole  T ceth. 
Sore  Le^s  helpeth  the  Gums  that  are  fore,  and  fetleth  the 
pimples'^  *  pallat  of  the  Mouth  in  its  place  when  it  is  fal- 
Freclilesy  Icndown:  It  clenfeth  and  healeth  the  Ulcers 
in  the  Mouth  or  fecret  parts,  and  is  very  good 
for  inward  Wounds,  and  to  clofc  the  lips  of 
green  Wounds  j  as  alio  to  heal  oldjmoiltjcor- 
rupt  running  Sores  in  the  Legs  or  elfwhere  ; 
Being  bruifed  and  applied  to  the  Soles  of  the 
Feet,  and  the  Hand-wrefts,  it  wonderfully 
cooleth  the  hot  fits  of  Agues,  be  they  never  fo 
violent.  The  diftilied  water  clenfeth  the  skin 
of  all  difcolourings  therein,  as  Morphew,Sun- 
burning  &c.  as  ^fo  Pimples,  Freckles,  and 
the  like  j  and  dropped  into  the  Eyes  or  cloaths 
wet  therein  and  applied,  taketh  away  the  heat, 
and  InflamatioHS  in  them* 

Now  Dame  V ernes  hath  fitted  women  with 
two  Herbs  of  one  name,  one  to  help  Concep  - 
tidn,  the  other  to  maintain  beauty,  and  what 
more  can  be  expedleftof  her  ?  What  now  re¬ 
mains  for  you  but  to  love  your  Husbands,  and 
not  to  be  wanting  to  your  poor  Neighbors. 

:  Thiftles. 


OF-thcfe  there  arc  many  kinds  growing 
here  in  'Englitnd^  which  are  fo  well 
known  that  they  need  n©  Defeription :  Their 
difference  is  ealily  known  by  the  places  where 
they  grow  ;  Vi%> 

Place. 

Some  grow  in  Fields,  fome  in  Meadows, 
and  fome  among  the  Corn :  others,  on 
Heaths,  G  reens,  and  waft  grounds  in  many 
places. 

Time. 

'  They  all  Flower  in  July  and  Mugufl,  and 
their  Seed  is  ripe  quickly, after. 

Venues  and  Vfe. 

All  thefe  Thiftles  are  good  to  provoke  U- 
rine,  and  to  amend  the  {linking  fmcll  thereofj 
as  alfo  the  rank  Imel  of  the  Armpits,  or  of  the 


Vifury,  . . . -  - . ..f— . - 

ill  fmel ,  whol  Body,  being  boyled  in  Wine  and  drunk  j 


Sure  rules  it,  it  is  fuch  a  prickly  bufi- 
nefs. 

\ 

^  ^  •I' 4?  #  *1  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^  ^ 

The  Melancholly 
Thiftle. 

Defeription. 

THis  rifeth  up  with  a  tender  fingle  hoary 
green  Stalk,  bearing  thereon  four  or  five 
long  hoary  green  Leaves,  dented  about  the 
edges,  the  points  whereof  are  little  or  nothing 
prickly,  SfTid  at  the  top  ufually  but  one  Head, 
yet  femtimes  from  tfie  bofom  of  t-he  upper- 
moft  Leaf  there  fhooteth  forth  another  fmal- 
ler  Head,  fcaly  and  fomwhat  prickly^  with  ma¬ 
ny  reddifli  Purple  Thrums  or  Threds  in  the 
middle,  which  being  gathered  frefh  will  keep 
the  colour  a  long  time,  and  fadeth  not  from 
the  Stalk  in  a  long  time,while  it  perfefteth  the 
Seed,  which  is  of  a  mean  bignefs  lying  in  the 
Down  :  The  Root  hath  many  long  Strings 
faftned  tothe  Head,  or  upper  part,  which  is 
blackifh  and  perifheth  not. 

There  is  another  fort  little  differing  from 
the  former, but  that  the  Leaves  are  more  green 
above  and  more  hoary  underneath  j  and  the 
Stalk  being  about  two  foot  high  beareth  but 
one  large  fcaly  Head,  with  threds  and  Seeds  as 
the  former. 

Place. 

They  grow  in  many  moift  Meadows  of  this 
Land,  as  well  in  thefe  Southern,  as  in  the 
Northern  parts. 

Time. 

They  Flower  about  July 3  or  Muguftj  and 
their  Seed  ripeneth  quickly  after* 

Vertues  and  Vfe. 

Their  Vertues  are  but  a  few,  but  thofe  not 
to  be  defpifed,  for  the  Dccoftion  of  the  Thi¬ 
ftle  in  Wine  being  drunk,  expels  fuperfluous 
Mel  ancholly  out  of  the  Body,  and  msdte  a  man 
as  merry  as  a  Cricket ,  fuperfluous  Melan-  •^elan* 
cholly  caufeth  care,  fear,  fadnefs,defpair,envy,  choUy. 
and  many  evils  more  bcfidcs,  but  Religion, 
teacheth  to  wait  upon  Gods  Providence,  and 
caft  our  care  upon  Him,  who  careth  for  us  j 
what  a  fine  thing  were  it  if  men  and  women 
could  live  fo  ?  and  yet  feven  yeers  care  and  fear 
makes  a  man  never  the  wifer,  nor  a  farthing 
the  richer.  'Diofeorides  faith,  the  Root  born 
about  one  doth  the  like,  and  removes  all  difea- 
fes  of  Melaneholly.  Modern  Writers  laugh  at 
him,  let  them  laugh  that  wins,  my  Opinion 
is,  that ’tis  the  belt  Remedy  againft  all  Me- 
lancholly  Difeafes  that  grows,  they  that  pleafe 
may  ufe  it :  ’tis  under  ^  <7fricoyK,and  therefore 


^  !•  J - jg  -  J - -  - -  - 

fiinking  and  are  laid  alfo  to  help  a  ftinkmg  breath  and 

Breathy  to  ftrengthen  the  Stomach.  faith  that  -  „  , 

Stomach,  the  juyee  bathed  on  the  place  that  wanteth  under  both  S^fwm  and  one  rids  Me- 

hair,it  being  fallen  off,  will  caufeit  to  grow  j  lancholly  by  Sympathy,  thcothtsrby  Antipa- 
again  fpeedily.  l 


guesi 
/lagUC:, 
Objtru^i 
cni} 
liver 
Spleen, 
Stone, 
Vropjie, 
Stitches 
the  fide, 
Livcfi 
Blood. 


The  Englijh  Thyjitian. 


nr 


V 


Our  Ladies  Thi file. 

Vefeription. 

THis  hath  diverfe  very  large  and  broad 
Leaves  lying  on  the  ground,  cut  in,  and 
as  it  were  crumpled,  but  fomwhat  hairy  on  the 
edges,  of  a  white  green  fhining  colour,whcre- 
in  are  many  lines  and  ftrakes  of  a  milky  white 
colour,  running  all  over,  and  fet  with  many 
ftiarp  and  ftift'  prickles  all  about  5  Among 
which  rifeth  up  one  or  more  ftrong,  round, 
and  prickly  ftalks,  fet  full  of  the  like  Leaves  up 
to  the  top,  where  at  the  end  of  every  Branch, 
cometh  forth  a  great  prickly  Thiflle  like 
head,  ftrcngly  armed  with  pricks,  and  with 
bright  purple  Thrums  riling  out  of  the  middle 
of  them  i  after  they  are  paft,the  Seed  groweth 
in  the  faid  hc-ads,  lying  in  a  great  deal  of  foft 
white  Down,  which  is  fomwhat  flattilh  and 
(hining,  large  and  brown.  The  Root  is  great, 
Ipreading  in  the  ground,  with  many  firings, 
and  fmal  fibres  fafined  thereto.  All  the  whol 
Plant  is  bitter  in  taft. 

T?lcLce. 

Ii  is  frequent  on  the  Bank  of  almoft  every 
Ditch. 

Xinte. 

It  Plowreth  and  Seedeth  in  June,  J uly,  and 
^Augufi:. 

Venues  and  vfe. 

Our  Ladies  Tbi(ile  is  thought  to  be  as  effe- 
aoal  as  Carduits  BenediClus  for  Agues,  and  to 
prevent  and  cure  infection  of  the  Plague,  as 
.  alfo  to  open  Obfiruftions  of  the  Liver  and 
Spleen,  and  thereby  is  good  againfi  thejaun- 
dices  Itprovoketh  Urine,  breaketh  and  ex- 
pelleth  the“Stone,and  is  good  for  the  Dropfie: 
It  i$  effectual  alfo  for  the  pains  in  the  fides, 
and  many  other  inward  pains  and  gripings : 
j  The  Seed  and  difiilled  water  are  held  powerful 
to  all  the  purpofes  aforelaid  j  and  befides,  it 
is  often  applied  both  inwardly  to  drink,  and 
outwardly  with  Cloathes  or  Spunges  to  the 
Region  of  the  Liver  to  cool  the  difiempera- 
ture  thereof,  and  to  the  Region  of  the  Heart, 
aeainft  fwounings  and  pafltons  of  it.  , 

Tt  clenfeth  the  blood  exceedingly,  and  in 
Spring  ifyoupleafe  to  boyl  the  tender  Plant, 
(but  cut  off  the  Prickles,  unlefs  you  have  a 
mind  to  choak  your  felf  )  it  will  change  your 
blood  as  the  feafon  changes,  and  that’s  the  way 
to  be  fafe,  as  to  change  as  the  times  change  is 
the  way  to  live  fccurc,  and  that  PlattercTs  and 
Weather-cocks  know  wcl  enough. 


TheWooIIe  y,  or  Cotton 
Thiftle.  ^ 


Deferiptitn. 

'^His  hath  many  large  Leaves  lying  on  the 
ground,  fomwhat  cut  in,  and  as  it  were 
crumpled  on  the  edges,  of  a  green  colour  on 
che  upper  fide,  but  covered  over  with  a  long 
hairy  Wool  or  Cottony  Down,  fet  with  moft 
fharp  and  cruel  pricks  ,  from  the  middle  of 
whofe  heads  of  PloWers  come  forth  many  pur» 
plifh  crimfori  threds,  and  fomtimes  white,  al¬ 
though  but  feldom  :  The  Seed  that  followeth 
in  thefc  white  downy  heads  is  fomwhat  large, 
long,  and  round,  refembling  the  Seed  of  I-a- 
dies  Thifile,  but  paler :  The  Root  is  great, 
and  thick,  fpreading  much,  yet  ufually  dieth 
after  Seedtime. 

Tlace. 

It  groweth  on'  diverfe  Ditch  Banks,  and  in 
the  Cornfields  and  High-wayes,  generally 
throughout  the  Land  j  and  is  often  found 
growing  in  Gardens. 

Time. 

It  Plowreth  andbeareth  Seed  .about  the  end 
of  Summer,  when  other  Thiftlcs  do  Flower 
and  Seed. 

Vertues  andufe. 

Dio  j  corides  and  Tliny  write.  That  the 
Leavs  and  Roots  hereof  taken  in  drink,  Hel- 
peth  thole  that  have  a  Crick  in  their  Neck, 
that  they  cannot  turn  it  unlefs  they  turn  their 
whol  Body.  faith.  That  the  Root  and 
Leaves  hereof  arc  good  for  fuch  perfons  that 
have  their  Bodies  drawn  together  by  fome 
Spafm  or  Convulfion,  or  other  Infirmities,  as 
the  Rickets' (of  3s  the  Colledg  of  Phyfitians 
would  have  it,  the  Rachites ,  about  which 
name  they  have  quarrel’d  fuffidently)  in 
Children  ,  being  a  Difeafc  that  hindereth 
their  growth,  by  binding  their  Nerves,  Liga¬ 
ments,  and  whol  firufture  of  their  Body. 

The  Fullers  Thiftle^  o/- 
TeafeL 

'"I  Flis  is  fo  well  known  that  it  iicedcth  no 
Deferiprion,  being  ufed  by  the  Cloath- 
workers. 

The  wild  Teafel  is  in  all  things  like  the  for¬ 
mer  but  that  the  prickles  are  fmal,  foft,  and 
R  r  z  upright. 


228 


uprightj  not  hooked  or  fiifF j  and  the  Flowers 
of  this  are  of  fine  blufh  or  pale  Carnation  co¬ 
lour,  but  of  the  Manured  kind  whitifii. 

P/tfce. 

The  firftgroweth  being  fown  in  Gardens  or 
Fields  for  the  ufc  of  Gloathworkers :  The  o- 
ther  neer  Ditches  and  Cills  of  water  in  many 
places  of  this  Land. 

Time* 

They  Flower  in  July 3  and  are  ripe  in  'the 
end  of  >4uguft‘ 

Venues  and  Vfe> 

•2)io/cBr}des  faith.  That  the  Root  bruifed 
and  boyled  in  Wine  until  it  be  thick,  and  kept 
SnabrazenVeflelor  Pot,  ond  after  fpread  as 
a  Salve  and  applied  to  the  Fundament,  doth 
leal  the  clefts  thereof,  as  alfo  Cankers  and 
Fiftulaes  therein,  as  alfo  taketh  away  Warts 
«nd  Wens  :  The  juyee  of  the  Leaves  dropped  , 
Into  the  Ears,  killeth  Worms  in  them.  The 
diftillcd  wai  er  of  the  Leaves  dropped  into  the 
Eyes,  t^cth  away  rednefs  and  miftsinthem 
that  hinder  the  light  j  and  is  often  ufed  by 
women  to  pitferve  their  beauty,  and  to  take  a- 
way  rednefs  and  Inflamations,  and  all  other 
heat  or  difcolourings. 


veflels  after  them ,  and  parted  in  the  fame 
manner,  having  imaller  browne  feeds  then  the 
former,  and  much  lharper  in  tafic :  The  root 
perilheth  after  feed  time,  but  abideth  the  fitft 
winter  after  the  Ipringing. 

Place. 

They  grow  in  fundry  places  of  this  Land, 
as  halfe  a  mile  from  Hatfield  by  the  river  fide 
under  a  hedge  as  you  go  to  Hatfield,  and  in 
the  itrect  of  Peckham  on  Surry  fide. 

Time. 

They  flowrc  and  feed  Ircm  May  to  .Aur 

g^fi- 

Venues  end  Vfe. 

ThefeMuftards  are  faid  to.  purge  the  bo¬ 
dy  both  upwards  and  downwards,  andprocu- 
rcth  Womens  Courfes  fo  abundantly,  that  it 
fufEacateth  the  birth :  It  breaketh  inward  Ira- 
pofthumes  being  taken  inwardly,  and  ufed  in 
Glifters,  hclpah  the  Sciatiea3  the  feed  applied 
outwardly  doth  the  fame.  It  is  an  efpeciall  in- 
gredient|  unto  Methridate  and  Treacle,  being 
of  it  felfc  an  Antidote  refilling  poyfon,  ve- 
nome,  and  putrefadlion  :  It  is  alfo  availcable 
in  many  caufes  for  which  the  common  Mu- 
ftard  is  ufed,J  but  fomewhat  weaker* 


Treacle  Muftard. 

i.. 

Defeription. 

THis  lifcth  up  with  a  hard  round  flalke  a- 
bout  a  foot  high, parted  into  feme  bran¬ 
ches,  having  divers  foft  green  leaves  fome¬ 
what  long  and  narrow  fet  thereon,  waved,  but 
not  cut  in  on  the  edges,  broadeft  towards  the 
ends,  and  fomewhat  round  pointed  :  The 
flowers  are  white  that  grow  at  the  tops  of  the 
branches,' Ipikc  fafhion  one  above  another, 
after  which  come  large  round  pouches,  parted 
in  the  middle  with  a  furrow,  having  one  blac- 
kilh  brown  feed  in  either  fide,  lomewhat 
fliarp  in  tall,  and  fmclling  of  Garlick,  elpe- 
cially  in  the  fields  where  it  is  naturall,  but  not 
fo  much  in  gardens  :  The  roots  are  fmall  and 
threddy,  periftiing  every  yeare.  And  here 
give  me  leave  to  adde  Methridate  Mullard,  al¬ 
though  it  may  feem  more  properly  by  the 
name  to  belong  to  the  Alphabet  M. 

Methridate  Muftard. 

THis greweth  higher  then  the  former, 
fpreading  more  and  longer  branches, 
whofe  leaves  are  fmaller  and  narrower,  feme- 
times  unevenly  dented  about  tlie  edges  j  the 
Flowers' are  final  and  white,  growing  on  long 
branches,  with  much  fmajler  and  rounder  feed 


TheBIack-Thornc  or 
Sloe^Bufh. 

THis  is  fo  well  knewfle,  that  it  needeth  no 
defeription. 

Place. 

It  groweth  in  every  place  and  Countrey,  in 
the  hedges  and  borders  of  fields. 

Time. 

It  flowreth  in  Aprilli  and  fometimes  in 
March,  but  ripeneth  the  fruit  after  all  other 
plums  whatfoever,  and  is  not  fit  to  be  eaten 
until  the  Autumne  frofl  have  mellowed  it- 
Venues  and  ufc. 

All  the  parts  of  the  Sloc-Bufli  are  binding, 
cooling ,  and  drying ,  and  all  cffcduall  to  Binds,  . 
flay  bleeding  at  the  nofe  and  mouth,  or  any  o-  (^^ols^dnes 
thcr  place ,  the  Lask  of  the  belly,  or  ftomach,  Blee4htg 
or  the  Bloody  Flux ,  the  two  tpuch  abounding  Plux  , 
of  womens  Courfes,  and  hclpeth  to  cafe  the  Bloody 
paines  in  the  fides,  bowels ,  and  guts ,  that  Plux, 
come  by  over-much  fcovvrmg,  to  drink  the  dc-  gnawings 
codlion  of  the  barke  of  the  roots,  or  more  ^nbowds 
ufually  the  decoftion  of  the  Berries  cither  nnd  ^0- 
frefh  or  dried.  The  Conferve  is  alfo  of  y cry  snaebj. 
muchufc,  andmoft  familiarly  taken  for  the 
puipofcs  aforefaid  :  But  the  difiillcd  water  of 
the  Flowers  firfl  fieeped  in  Sack  for  a  night, 
and  drawnc  thcrc-frcm  by  the  heat  of  talnc^ 
urn  AngHceabaihs 3  is  a  meft  certainc  remedy 
tried  and  approved  to  safe  all  manner  of 
gnawings  in  the  ficmach,the  fides  and  bowels, 

or 


1 


The  Englijh  Thyjitian, 


21p 


or  any  griping  pains  in  any  of  them,  to  drink 
a  fmal  quantity  when  the  extremety  of  pain  is 
upon  them  :  The  Leaves  alfo  are  good  to 
make  Lotions,  to  gargle  and  wafh  the  Mouth 
Alouth  &  and  Throat,  wherein  are  Swellings, Sores,  or 
Throat  f  Kernels, and  to  ftay  the  Defluxions  of  Rhewm 

to  the  Eyes  or  other  parts ,  as  alfo  to  cool  the 
heat  and  Inflamations  in  them,  and  to  eafe 
Headach.  hot  pains  of  the  Head,  to  bath  the  Forehead 
and  Temples  therewith.  The  fimplc  diftilled 
water  of  the  Flowers  is  very  eftedual  for  the 
laid  purpofes,  and  is  the  condenfate  juyee  of 
the  Sloes.  The  diftilled  water  of  the  green 
Berries  is  ufed  alfo  for  the  faid  effefts. 


Brutfeti 

woundsj 

VUersj 


Ruptures, 

'2^avils 

pclimg 


out. 


4*  •I’ •I?  *1?  ^  ^  ^  ^  4? ‘I’ *1’ 4?  4*  •  ^  ^  ^  ^ 
Thoioughwax. 


Defeription. 

THe  common  Throughwax  fendeth  forth 
one  ftraight  round  Stalk,  and  fomtimes 
more,  two  foot  high  and  better,  whofe  lower 
Leaves  being  of  a  blewifh  green  colour  are 
fmallcr  and  narrower  than  thofe  up  higher,and 
ftand  dole  thereto,  not  compafling  it  i  but  as 
they  grow  higher,  they  do  more  and  more  en- 
compafs  the  Stalk,  until  it  wholly  (as  it  were) 
pals  through  them,  branching  toward  the  top 
into  many  parts,  where  the  Leaves  grow  fmal- 
ler  again,  every  one  ftanding  ftngly,  and  never 
two  at  any  Joynt :  The  Fldwers  arc  very 
fmal  and  yellow,  ftanding  in  tufts  at  the  heads 
of  the  Branches,  where  afterwards  grow  the 
Seed,  fmal  and  blackifti,  many  thick  thruft  to¬ 
gether  :  The  Root  is  fmal,  long,  and  woody, 
periftiing  every  yeer  after  Seed  time,  and  ri- 
fing  again  plentifully  of  its  own  fowkigj 
Pdace . 

It  is  found  growing  in  many  Corn  Fields, 
and  Pafture  grounds  in  this  Land. 

Time. 

It  Flowreth  Itijuly,  and  the  Seed  is  ripe  in 
Auguft. 

Vevtues  and  life. 

Thoroughwax  is  of  a  fingular  good  ufe ,  for 
all  forts  of  Bruifas  and  Wounds  either  inward 
or  QUtward,  and  old  Ulcers  and  Sores  like- 
wife,  if  the  Decoftion  of  the  Herb  with  water 
or  Wine  be  drunk,  and  the  places  wafhed  ther- 
with,  or  the  Juyee  or  green  Herb  bruifed  or 
boyled  either  by  it  felf,  or  with  other  Herbs  in 
Oyl  or  Hogs  Greafe,  to  be  made  into  an 
Oyntment  to  ferve  all  the  yeer :  The  Deco¬ 
ction  of  the  Herb,  or  the  Pouder  of  the  dried 
Herb  taken  inwardly ,  and  the  fame  or  the 
green  Leaves  bruifed  and  applied  outwardly,  is 
fingular  good  to  cure  Ruptures  and  Burftings, 
cfpccially  in  Children,  before  it  be  two  old. 
Being  alfo  applied  with  a  little  Flower  and 
Wax  to  Coildrens  Navils  that  flick  forth  it 
helpeth  them. 


Tormentil. 

? 

VeferiptioH. 

'^His  hath  many  reddifh  {lender  weak 
Branches  fifing  from  the  Root,  lying  up¬ 
on  the  ground, or  rather  leaning  than  ftanding 
upright,  with  many  fhort  Leaves  that  ftand 
clofer  to  the  Stalks  than  Cinkfoyl  doth  ( which 
this  is  very  like)  with  the  Footftalk  encompaf- 
fing  the  Branches  in  feveral  places,  but  thofe 
that  grow  next  to  the  ground  are  fet  upon 
long  Footftalks,  each  whereof  are  like  the 
Leaves  of  Cinkfoyl,  butfomwhat  longer  and 
lefler,  and  dented  about  the  edges,  many  of 
them  devided  but  into  five  Leaves,  but  moft: 
of  them  into  fevens  whence  it  is  alfo  called 
Set/ oyl  i  yet  fome  may  have  fix  and  fome 
eight,  according  to  the  fertility  of  the  Soyl  : 

At  the  tops  of  the  Branches  ftand  diverfe  fmal 
yellow  Flowers  confifting  of  five  Leaves,  like 
thofe  of  Cinkfoyl,  but  fmaller.  The  Root  is 
fmaller  than  Biftort,  fomwhat  thick,  but  blac¬ 
ker  without,  and  not  fo  red  within,  yet  fom¬ 
times  a  little  crooked,  having  many  blackifh 
fibres  thereat. 

Place. 

It  groweth  as  well  in  Woods  and  fhadowy 
places,  as  in  the  open  Champion  Country,  a- 
bout  the  borders  of  Fields  in  many  places  of 
this  Land,  and  almoft  in  every  Broom  Field 
in  Ejjex. 

Time. 

It  Flowreth  all  the  Summer  longi 
V.ertms  and  Ufe. 

Tormentil  is  moft  excellent  to  ftay  all  kind 
of  Fluxes  of  Blood  or  Humors,  in  man  or  wo-  Flux] 
man,  whether  a^Nofe,  Mouth,  Belly,  os  osiy  Bleec^ng] 
Wound  in  the  Veins  or  elfwhere :  The  Juyee  p'eins  cut, 
of  the  Herb  or  Root  taken  in  drink,  not  only  terms 
refiftethall  Poyfon  and  Venom  of  any  Crea-  flops, 
ture,  but  of  the  Plague  it  felf,  and  Peftilen- 
tial  Feavers,  and  contagious  Difeafes,  as  the  p eftUence, 
Pox,  Meafels,  Purples,  &c.  expelling  the  Vc-  Smal pox 
nom  and  Infeftion  from  the  Heart  by  fwea-  Meafels 
ting,  if  the  green  Root  be  not  at  hand  to  be  Purples, 
had,  the  Pouder  of  the  dry  Root  is  as  effe- 
Clual,  a  dram  thereof  being  taken  every  mor¬ 
ning:  The  DccoCbionlikewifcofthe  Herbs 
and  Roots  made  in  Wine  and  drunk  worketh 
the  fame  effeCl  j  and  fo  doth  the  diftilled  wa¬ 
ter  of  the  Herb  and  Root  being  fteeped  in 
Wine  for  a  night,  and  then  diftilled  in  Balnea 
Marice.  This  Water  thus  diftilled  taken  with 
fome  Venice  Treacle,  and  the  party  prefently  - 
laid  to  fweat  will  certainly  (with  Gods  help) 
expel  any  Venom  or  poyfon,  or  the  Plague, 

Feaver,  &c.  for  it  is  an  ingredient  of  efpccial 
refpeftinall  Antidotes  or  Counterpoyfons. 

There  is  not  found  any  Rost  more  eftedual  to 
S  i  help 


The  EngUp?  Thyptian. 


French 


Mifcar- 

riagcy 


SpkeUi  help  any  Flux  of  the  Belly,  Stomach,  Spleen, 
B'loo^  or  Blood  than  this,  to  be  taken  inwardly,  or 
Inflamed,  applied  outwardly.  The  Juy^e  taken  doth 
Liver,  wonderfully  open  Obftruftions  of  the  Liver 
Lungs,  and  Lungs,  and  thereby  in  fhort  fpace  hclpeth 
Tellffrv  tfie  yellow  Jaundice.  Some  ufe  to  make  Cakes 
Jaundice,  hereof  as  well  to  ftay  all  Fluxes,  as  to  reftrain 
all  Chollerick  Belchings,  and  much  Vomi¬ 
tings  with  Loathings  in  the  Stomach :  The 
Pouder  of  the  dried  Root  made  up  with  the 
white  of  an  Egg  and  baked  upon  a  hot  Tile 
will  do  it. 

Andreus  Valeflus  is  of  opinion.  That  the 
Decoftion  of  this  Root  is  no  lefs  effectual  to 
cure  the  French  Pox,than  Guajacum,ox  China 
and  ’tis  not  unlikely,  becaufe  it  fo  mightily 
refifteth  putrefadlion  ;  Lebel  faith, That  T^gn- 
delitius  ufed  it  as  HermodaClils  for  Joynt-a- 
ches  :  The  Pouder  alfo,  or  Decodfion  to  be 
drunk,  or  to  fit  therein  as  a  Bath  is  an  afl'ured 
Remedy  againft  abortion  in  Women,  if  it 
proceed  from  the  over  Fluxibility  or  weaknefs 
of  the  inward  retentive  faculty;  as  alfo  a 
Plaiftcr  made  therewith  and  Vinegar  applyed 
to  the  Reins  of  the  Back,  doth  much  help  not 
only  this  but  alfo  thofe  that  cannot  hold  their 
Water,  the  Pouder  being  taken  in  the  juyee  of 
Plantane ;  and  it  is  alfo  commended  againft 
the  worms  in  Children.  It  is  very  powerful 
in  Ruptures  and  Burftings :  as  alfo  for  Brui- 
fes  and  Falls,  to  be  ufed  as  well  outward  as  in¬ 
wardly.  The  Root  hereof  made  up  with  Pcl- 
litory  of  Spain  and  Allumj  and  put  into  an 
hollow  Tooth,  not  only  affwageth  the  pain, 
but  ftaicth  the  Flux  of  Humors  which  caufed 
it,  Tormentil  is  no  lefs  effedlual  and  power¬ 
ful  a  Remedy  for  outward  Wounds,  Sores,  and 
Hurts,  than  for  inward,  and.  is  therefore  a 
fpccial  Ingredient  meet  to  be  ufed  in  all 
Wound  drinks.  Lotions,  and  Injcftions  for 
foul  corrupt  rotten  Sores  and  Ulcers,  of  the 
Mouth,  Secrets,  or  other  parts  of  the  Body. 
And  to  put  either  the  Juyee  or  Pouder  of  the 
Root  into  fuch  Qyntments,  Plaifters,  and 
fuch  things  that  are  to  be  applied  to  Wounds 
and  Sores  :  it  alfo  difiblveth  all  Knots,  Ker¬ 
nels,  and  hardnefs  gathered  about  the  Ears, 
the  Throat,  and  Jaws  and  the  Kings  Evil  if 
the  Leaves  and  Roots  be  bruifed  and  applied 
thereto :  The  fame  alfo  cafeth  the  pains  of  the 
Sciatica  or  Hip-gout  by  reftraining  the  (harp 
Humors  that  flow  thereto.  The  ]  uyee  of  the 
Leaves  and  Roots  ufed  with  a  little  Vinegar, 
is  alfo  a  fpecial  Remedy  againft  the  running 
Sores  of  the  Head  or  other  parts.  Scabs  alfo 
and  the  Itch,  or  any  fuch  eruptions  in  the  Skin 
proceeding  of  Salt  and  (harp  Humors  ;  The 
fame  alfo  is  effeftual  for  the  Piles  or  Hemor¬ 
rhoids  if  they  be  waflicd  and  bathed  therVvith, 
orwiththcDiftilled  water  of  the  Herb  and 
Roots  ;  It  is  found  alfo  helpful  to  dry 
up  any  {harp  Rhewm  that  diftillejh  from  the 


Viabetes, 

Worms, 

Kugtures, 


toothach. 

Wounds, 

Sores, 

Hurts, 


G  out. 


Srabby 

Heads. 


Head  into  the  Eyes  caufing,  rednefs,  pain, 
waterings,  Itchings,  or  the  like,  if  a  little  pre¬ 
pared  or  jwhite  be  ufed  with  the 
Diftillcd  water  hereof :  Many  Women  ufc 
this  Waterasafecretto  help  themfclves  and 
others  when  they  arc  troubled  with  the  too 
much  flowing  of  the  Whites  or  Reds,  both  to 
drink  it,  and  injeft  it  with  a  Syringe.  And 
here’s  enough,  only  remember,  theS»a  chal- 
lengeth  the  Herb. 

Turnfole,  or  Heliotro^ 
piurn. 

'  Defeription. 

'^Hc  greater  Turnfole  rifeth  up  with  one 
upright  Stalk  about  a  foot  high  or  more, 
deviding  ft  fclf  almoft  from  the  bottom  into 
diverfefmallef  Branches  of  a  hoai-y  colour: 
at  each  Joynt  of  the  Stalk  and  Branches  grow 
two  final  broad  Leaves  fomwhat  white  or  hoa¬ 
ry  alfo :  At  the  tops  of  the  Stalks  and  Bran¬ 
ches  ftand  many  fmall  white  Flowers  confi- 
fting  of  four  and  fomtime-s  five  very  fmall 
Leaves,  fet  in  order  one  above  another,  upon 
a  final  crooked  fpike  which  turneth  inwards 
like  a  bowed  finger,  opening  by  degre-es  as  tho 
Flowers  blow  open  j  after  which  in  their  pla¬ 
ces  come  final  corner’d  Seed,  four  for  the  moft 
part  Handing  together.  The  Root  is  final  and 
threddy  perifhing  every  yeer,  and  the  SeU 
{bedding  every  yeer,  raifeth  it  again  the  next 
Spring. 

Flace. 

It  groWeth  in  Gardens,  and  Flowreth  and 
Seedeth  with  us  in  England,  notwithftanding 
it  is  not  natural  to  this  Land,  but  to  Italy, 

Spain,  and  Trance,  where  it  groweth  plenti¬ 
fully. 

Venues  and  Vfe. 

Diu/coridcr  faith.  That  a  good  Handful  of 
this,  which  is  called  the  greater  Turnfole,  boy- 
Icd  in  Water  and  drunk,  pnrgeth  both  Choi-  ChoUer, 
lerand  Flegm  :  And  boyleckwith  Cummin  Flegm, 
and  drunk,  helpeth  the  Stone  in  the  Reins,  Stons, 
Kidneys,  or  Bladder,  provoketh  Urine  and  Difury, 
Womens  Courfes,  and  caufeth  an  eafie  and  Terms 
fyeedy  delivery  in  Childbirth.  The  Leaves  provolies, 
bruifed  and  applied  to  places  pained  with  the  Gout,. 
Gout,  or  that  have  been  out  of  joynt  and  new-  Warts, 
ly  fet  are  full  of  pain,  do  give  much  cafe.  ThJ  wens. 
Seed,  and  the  Juyee  of  the  Leaves  alfo  being  Disjun^ 
rubbed  with  a  little  Salt  upon  Warts,  Wens,  Bures, 
and  other  hard  Kernels  in  the  Face,  Eyelids, 
or  any  other  part  of  the  Body,  will  by  often 
ufing  take  them  away. 

’TisanHerbof  thc  Sun,  and  a  good  one 
too. 

Meadow 


1 


The  EngliJI?  Thyjltian. 


Meadow  Trefoyl^orHo- 
neyfuckles. 

'^Hefe  arc  fo  well  known,  efpccially  by  the 
-*•  name  of  Honevfuckles,  White  and  Red, 
that  I  need  not  deferibe  them. 

Place. 

They  grow  almoft  every  where  in  this 
Land. 

Venues  and  ufe. 

Tyodonctis  iaiihj  The  Leaves  and  Flowers 
are-good  to  cafe  the  griping  pains  of  the  Guts, 
Belly- ach)  the  Ho  b  being  boylcd  and  ufed  in  a  Clyfier : 

If  the  Herb  be  made  into  a  Piiltis  and  applied 
to  Inflamations,  it  will  eafe  them.  Thejuyee 
‘Jr^opped  into  the  Eyes  isafamilier  Medicine 
onsj  vvitli  many  Country  people  to  take  away  the 

Pm  PinandWeb  (as  they  call  it)  in  the  Eyes,  it 
Webi  alfo  allaycth  the  Heat  and  bloodfliooting  of 
Eyes,  them  :  Country  people  do  alfo  in  many  places 
drink  the  juyee  hereof  againft  the  biting  of  an 
Adder,  and  having  boyled  the  Herb  in  water, 
they  firft  walh  the  place  with  the  Decoftion, 
and  then  lay  fome  of  the  Herb  alfo  to  the  hurt 
place.  The  Herb  alfo  boyled  in  Swines  Grcafe 
and  fo  made  into  an  Oyntment,  is  good  to 
apply  to  the  biting  of  any  Venemous  Crea- 
Venemous  ture.  The  Herb  alfo  bruifed  and  heated  be- 
Beafti  tween  two  Tiles,  and  applied  hot  to  the  fhare, 
ca^eth  them  to  make  water  who  had  it  Hop’d 
Vifuryj  before :  It  is  held  likewife  to  be  good  for 
Wounds,  and  to  take  away  Scars.  The  De- 
Womdsi  codion  of  the  Herb  and  Flowers  with  the 
Scars,  Seed  and  Root  taken  for  fome  time,  helpeth 
Women  that  are  troubled  with  the  Whites. 
IJ'hUes,  The  Seed  and  Flowers  boyled  in  Water,  and 
after  made  into  a  Pultis  with  fome  Oyl  and 
applied,  helpeth  hard  Swellines  and  Impo- 
SweUwgS)  liurnes. 

/Ipo^ums.  0( Trcfoyl  or  ihree  leaved  Grafs,  there  arq 
very  many  forts  deferibed  by  Authors,  bdt  one 
I  have  found  out  which  I  never  red  of  the 
Leaf  is  but  fmall  and  it  beareth  a  fmall  yellow 
Flowcr,ln  the  midil  of  each  Leaf  of  the  Herb 
isaperfedpidureofaHeart  in  red  colour^ 
it  grows  plentifully  in  a  Field  between  Long¬ 
ford  anu  BoTv  j  alfo  I  found  one  Root  in  the 
High-way  between  Cbadwcl  and  Rim  ford  in 
Pjjex,  as  alfo  another  in  the  High-way  be-  | 
tween  Horn-Church  and  Vpmmfter  in  the  fame 
County,  the  taft  is  fomthing  more  hot  and 
fpi^y  than  the  taft  of  the  reft  is. 


T utfan,  pr  Park  Leaves. 

"Defcription. 

T  His  hath  many  brownifh  (hining  round 
Stalks,  crefled  all  the  length  thereof,  ri- 

fingtobetwo  and  fomtimes  three  foot 

high,  branching  forth  even  from  the  bottom, 
having  diyerie  Joynts,  and  at  each  of  theni 
two  lair  large  Leaves  Handing,  of  a  dark 
blcwilh  green  colour  on  the  upper  fide  and 
of  a  yellowifh’green  underneath,^  turning  red- 
difti  towards  .Autumn,  but  abiding  on  the 
Branches  all  the  Winter:  At  the  tops  of  the 
Stalks  and  Branches  Hand  large^ycllow  Flo- 
wers,and  Heads  with  Seed,  which  being  gree- 
nifti  at  the  firft,  and  afterwards  reddifli,  turn 
to  be  of  a  blackifh  purple  colour  when  they  arc 
through  ripe,  with  fmal  brownilh  Seed  within 
them,  and  then  yield  a  reddilh  Juyee  or  Li¬ 
quor,  of  a  rcafonable  good  ftent,  lomwhat  re- 
linous,  and  of  an  harlh  or  ftiptich  taft,  as  ^he 
Leaves  alfo  and  the  Flowers  be,  although 
much  lefs,  but  do  not  yield  fuch  a  deer  Claret 
Wine  Liquor  as  fome  fay  it  doth ;  The  Root 

IS  brownifli,  fomwhat  great,hard,  and  wood y^ 
Iprcading  well  m  the  ground. 

"Place. 

It  growethin  many  Woods,  Groves,  and 
Wooddy  Grounds,  as  Parks  and  Forrefts,  and 
by  Hedg  fides  ,n  many  places  of  this  Land,  as 

Wild  of  P^ent,  and  in  many  other  places  need- 
iels  to  recite. 

-  Pime. 

It  Flowreth  later  than  St.  Johns,  or  St.  Pe¬ 
ters,  wort. 

Venues  and  ufe. 

Tutfan  pmgeth  Chollerick  Humors  as  St. 

Peters  wort  IS  raid  to  do,  for  therein  it  wor- 
keth  the  fame  efteds,  both  to  help  the  Sciatica 
and  Gout,  and  to  heal  burnings  by  fire :  It 
ftayeth  alfo  the  bleeding  of  Wounds,  if  either  ChoUer, 
the  green  Herb  be  bruifed,  or  the  ponder  o(  Sciatica, 
the  dry  be  applied  thereto.  It  hath  been  ^c-Oout, 
counted  and  certainl^j^  is  a  Soveraign  Herb  to  Burninir, 
heal  any  Wound  or  Sore  either  outwardly  or  Bleedmg, 
inwardly,and  therfore  alwaies  ufed  in  Drinks,  ^^'ounds. 
Lotions,  Balms,  Oyls,  Oyntments  for  any  ulcers. 
fore  of  green  Wound,  or  old  Ulcers  and  Sores, 
in  all  which  the  continual  experience  of  for- 
rner  ges  hath  confirmed  the  ufe  thereof  to  be 
admirable  good,  though  it  be  not  fo  much  in 
ufenowaswhenPhyfTtians  and  Chirurgeons 
were  fo  wife  as  to  ufe  Herbs  more  than  now 
they  do. 

It  IS  an  Herb  of  Saturn  and  a  moft  noble 
Antiyenenan. 


S  Cz 


Garden 


ip 


The  EngUp? 


Dtfury 

Strangury 

Stitch 

txr'ms 

prov^lies 


Mrefi 


(bort  wind 

Cough 

Flegm 


PefiiUnce 

wind 


Garden  Valerian. 

BefcriptioHo 

THis  hath  a  thick  fltert  grayifti  Root 
lying  for  the  moft  part  above 
ground,  fhooting  forth  on  all  fides 
other  fuch  like  fmall  pieces  or 
Roots,  which  have  all  of  them  many  long  and 
great  firings  or  fibres  under  them,  in  the 
ground,  whereby  it  draweth  nouriftiment. 
From  the  Heads  of  thefc  Roots  fpring  up  ma¬ 
ny  green  Leaves,  which  at  firft  are  lome- 
what  broad  and  long  without  any  devifion  at 
all  in  them,  or  denting  on  the  edges,  but  thofc 
that  rife  up  after  arc  more  and  more  devided 
on  each  fide,  fometo  the  middle  Rib,  being 
winged,  as  made  of  many  Leaves  together  on 
a  Stalk, &  thofe  upon  the  Stalk  in  like  manner 
arc  more  devided,  but  fmaller  towards  the  top 
than  belowtThe  Stalk  rifeth  to  be  a  yard  high 
or  morejfomtimes  branched  at  the  top,w* ^ma¬ 
ny  final  whitifti  Flowers, fomtimes  daih’d  over 
at  the  edges  with  a  pale  purplifti  colour,  of  a 
little  feent:  which  pafling  away  there  followeth 
fmall  brownilh  white  Seed  that  is  cafily  carried 
away  with  the  wind.  The  Root  finellcth 
more  ftrong  than  either  Leaf  or  Flower,  and 
is  of  more  ufe  in  Medicine, 

Flace. 

It  is  generally  kept  with  us  in  our  Gar^ 
dens. 

Time. 

It  Flowreth  in  J une  and  J uly^  and  continu- 
eth  Flowring  until  the  Frofts  pull  it  down. 
Venues  and  Vfe. 

Vidfesrides  faithjThat  the  Garden  Valerian 
hath  a  warming  Faculty,  and  that  being  diy- 
ed  and  given  to  drink,  it  provoketh  Urine  and 
helpeth  the  Strangury  :  The  Decodion  ther- 
of  taken  doth  the  like  alfo,  and  taketh  away 
pains  of  the  fides,  provoketh  Womens  Cour- 
fes  and  is  ufed  in  Antidotes.  Tliny  faith,That 
the  Pouder  of  the  Root  given  in  drink,  or  the 
Decodion  thereof  taken,  helpeth  all  Hoppings 
and  ftranglings  in  any  part  of  the  Body,  whe¬ 
ther  they  proceed  of  pains  in  the  Cheft  or 
fides,  and  taketh  them  away.  The  Root  of 
boyled  with  Liquoris,  Raifons,  and 
Annis  Seed,  is  fingular  good  for  thofe  that  are 
Ihort  winded,  and  for  thofe  that  are  troubled 
with  the  Cough,  and  helpeth  to  open  the  paf- 
fages,  and  to  expedorate  Flegm  eafily.  It  is 
given  to  thofe  that  are  bitten  or  ftung  by  any 
Venemous  Creature,  being  boyled  in  Wine. 
It  is  of  efpecial  Vertue  againft  the  Plague,  the 
Decodion  thereof  being  drunk,  and  the  Root 
being  ufed  to  fmcll  unt©  j  It  helpeth  alfo  to 
expel  the  wind  in  the  Belly.  Tire  green  Herb 


with  the  Root  taken  frefh,  being  bruifed  and 
applied  to  the  Head  taketh  away  the  pains  and  Hcadacb 
prickings  therein,  ftaieth  Rhewms  and  thin  £yex 
Diftillations ,  and  being  boyled  in  vihke  Pin  and 
Wine,  and  the  drop  thereof  put  into  the  eye, 
taketh  away  the  dimnefs  of  the-  fight,  or  any  wounds 
Pin  or  Web  therein ;  It  is  of  excellent  pro-  Splinters 
petty  to  heal  any  inward  Sores  or  W ounds,  as  thorns. 
alfo  for  outward  Hurts  or  Wounds,  and  draw¬ 
eth  any  Splinter  or  Thorn  out  of  the  Flefh. 

Vervain. 


DeferiptUn. 

THe  common  Vervain,  hath  fomwhat  long 
and  broad  Leaves  next  the  ground  deeply 
gafti’d  about  the  edges  and  feme  only  deeply 
dented  or  cut  all  alike,  of  a  blackiih  gi  een  co¬ 
lour  on  the  upper  fide,  and  fomwhat  gray  un¬ 
derneath  ‘  The  Stalk  is  fquare  branched  into 
feveral  parts,  rifing  about  two  foot  high,  efpe- 
cially  if  you  reckon  the  long  fpike  of  Flowers 
at  the  tops  of  them,  which  are  fet  on  all  fides 
one  above  another,  and  fomtimes  two  or  three 
together,  being  fmall  and  gaping,  of  a/ Pur- 
plifh  blew  colour,  and  white  intermixtj  af¬ 
ter  which  come  fmall  round  Seed  in  fmall  and 
fomwhat  long  Heads  :  The  Root  is  fmall  and 
long,  but  of  no  ufe. 

Place. 

It  groweth  generally  throughout  this  Land 
in  diverfe  places  by  the  Hedges  and  way  fides, 
and  other  waft  grounds. 

Time. 

It  Flowreth  about  /»/y,  and  the  Seed  is  ripe 
foon  after. 

Vertues  and  ufe. 

Vervain  is  hot  and  dry,  bitter,opening  Ob- 
ftruftious,  clenfing,  and  healing,  It  helpeth 
the  ycllowJaundice,the  Dropfie,and  the  Gout, 
the  defedls  of  the  Reins  and  Lungs,  and  gene¬ 
rally,  all  inward  pains  and  torments  of  the  Bo¬ 
dy,  the  Leaves  being  boyled  and  drunk  j  The 
fame  is  held  to  be  good  againft  the  bitings  of 
Serpents,  and  other  Venemous  Beaftss  and 
againft  the  Plague,  and  both  Tertian  and 
Quartane  Agues,killeth  and  expclleth  Worms 
in  the  Belly,  and  caufeth  a  good  colour  in  the 
Face  and  Body,  ftrengthneth  as  well  as  corre- 
aeth  the  Difeafes  of  the  Liver  and  Spleen,  is 
very  effectual  in  all  Difeafes  of  the  Stomach 
and  Lungs,  as  Coughs,  fhortnefs  of  Breath 
and  Wheefings,  and  is  fingular  good  againft 
•  the  Dropfie,  to  be  drunk  with  fomc  Peony 
Seeds,  bruifed  and  put  thereto  5  and  is  no  lefs 
prevalent  for  the  defeats  of  the  Reins  and 
Bladder,  to  clenfe  them  of  thofe  Humors  that 
ingender  the  Stone,  and  helpeth  to  break  the 
Stone  and  to  expel  Gravel :  It  confolidateth 
and  hcaleth  alfo  all  Wounds  both  inward  and 

outward. 


ObflruBi- 

ons 

Clenfing 

Healing 

Yellow 

Jaundice, 

Venemous 

Beafts) 

Pcfiilence 

Agues 

Worms 

Cough 

jhortnef 

og  Breath 

nheefing 

Stone 

Gravel 

Reins 

Bladder 


TheEn^liJh’Phyfttian.  '  233 


(fomb  ,  outward,  and  ftayeth  bleedings ,  and  ufed 
DropJtCi  with  feme  Honey  healcth  all  old  Ulcers  and 
Bleedin?3  Fiftulaes  in  the  Legs  or  other  parts  of  the  Bo- 
irounds'y  dy,  as  alfo  thofe  Ulcers  that  happen  in  the 
Vlcers,  Mouth, }  or  ufed  with  old  Hogs  greafe  it  hel- 
FifiidaeSi  peth  the  Swellings  and  pains  of  the  fecret  parts 
Hcudacb)  in  nian  or  Woman,  as  alfo  for,  the  Piles  and 
Fun’xie,  Hemorrhoids :  Applied  with  feme  Oyl  of 
Morphewy  Rofes  and  Vinegar  unto  the  Forehead  and 
Frecl^lesy  Temples,  it  eafeth  the  inveterate  pains  and 
ach  of  the  Head,  and  is  good  for  thofe  that 
axe  Frcnetick.  The  Leaves  bruifed,  or  the 
juyee  of  them  mixed  with  fome  Vinegar  doth 
wonderfully  elenfe  the  Skin,  and  taketh  away 
Morphew,  Freckles,  Puftulaes,  and  other  fuch 
like  Inflamations  and  deformities  of  the  Skin 
ill  any  pai't  of  the  Body.  T  he  diftilled  water 
of  the  Herb  when  it  is  in  his  full  ftrength, 
dropped  into  the  Byes,  clenfeth  them  from 
Films,  Clouds,  or  mifts  that  darken  the  fight , 
and  wonderfully  ftrengtheneth  the  Optick 
Nerves  i  The  faid  Water  is  very  powerful  in 
all  the  Difeafes  aforefaid  either  inward  or  out¬ 
ward,  whether  they  be  old  corroding  Sores,  or 
green  Wounds. 

This  alfo  is  an  Herb  of  Venus,  and  an  ex¬ 
cellent  Hc^rb  for  the  Womb,  to  drengthen  it 
and  remedy  all  the  cold  griefs  of  it,  as  Plan- 
tanc  doth  the  hot,  the  Herb  bruifed  and  hung 
about  the  Neck  helps  the  Headach. 

•Iff  ^  ^  ^ 

The  Vine. 

THe  Leaves  of  the  Englilh  Vine  (I  do  not 
intend  to  fend  y(Sh  to  the  C Murks  for  a 
Medicine)  being  boyled  make  a  good  Lotion 
Sore  for  fore  Mouths,  being  boyled  wixh^  Barley 
Mouth,  Meal  into  a  Pultis,  it  cools  Inflamations  of 
Jnfiamati-  Wounds,  the  droppings  of  the  Vine  when  ’tis 
ons,  cut  in  the  Spring,  which  Country  people  call 
Tears,  being  boyled  into  a  Syfup  with  Sugar 
Womens  and  taken  inwardly,  is  excellent  to  flay  Wo- 
Lortging,  mens  longings  after  every  thing  they  fee,whieh 
is  a  Difeafe  many  Women  with  Child  are  fub- 
jeft  too ;  the  Decodion  of  Vine  Leaves  in 
white  Wine  doth  the  like  :  alfo  the  Tears  of 
of  the  Vine  drunk,  two  or  three  fpoonfuls  at  a 
Stone,  time,  breaks  the  Stone  in  the  Bladder :  This 
is  a  very  good  Remedy,  and  it  is  difcreetly 
done  to  kill  a  Vine  to  cure  a  Man,  but  the 
Salt  of  the  Leaves  is  held  to  be  better. 

!  The  Aihes  of  the  burnt  Branches  will  make 
Teeth  Teeth  that  are  as  black  as  a  coal  to  be  as  white 
blacks  fnow  if  you*(io  but  every  morning  rub  them 

with  it/* 


Violets. 

THefe,  both  Tame  and  Wild,  are  fo  well 
known  that  they  need  no  Defaiption. 

Tim»  . 

They  Flower  until  the  end  of  Jmp,  but  are 
beft  in  March  and  the  beginning  of  April. 

Vertices  and  Z)fe. 

All  the  Violets  are  cold  and  moift  while  they 
are  frelh  and  green,  and  are  ufed  to  cool  any 
heat  or  diftemperature  of  the  Body,  either  in¬ 
wardly  or  outwardly,  as  Inflamations  in  the  Infamati-' 
Eyes,  in  the  Matrix  or  Fundament,  in  Impo-  on,  Eyes, 
flumes  alfo  and  hot  Swellings,  to  drink  the.  Womb, 
Decodion  of  the  Leaves  or  Flowers  made 
with  Water  or  Wine,  or  to  apply  them  Pultis 
wife  to  the  grieved  place,  it  likewife  eafeth 
pains  in  the  Head,  caufed  through  want 
fleep  j  or  in  any  other  place  arifing  of  heat,  etching, 
being  applied  in  the  fame  manner,  or  with 
Oyl  of  Rofes.  A  dram  weight  of  the  dried 
Leaves  of  the  Flowers  of  Violets  (but  the 
Leaves  moreflrongly)  doth  purge  the  Body 
of  Chollerick  Humors,  and  aflwageth  the  heat  ChoUer, 
being  taken  in  a  draught  of  Wine  or  any  other 
Drink  ;  The  Pouder  of  the  purple  Leaves  of 
the  Flowers  only  pick’d  and  dried,  and  drunk 
in  Water  is  faid  to  help  the  Quinfie,  and  the  ^inpe^ 
Falling-flcknefs  in  Children,  efpecially  in  the  Falling 
beginning  of  the  Difeafe.  The  Flowers  of  the  Jicltnef, 
White  f^2o/crrripeneth  and  diflblveth  S'Ncl-SvpeUings, 
lings.  The  Herb  or  Flowers  while  they  are 
frefli,  or  the  Flowers  when  they  are  dry,  are 
cffcdual  in  the  PluriCe,  and  ail  Difeafes  of  Fleare^e, 
LangSjto  lencfic  the  ftiarpncfj  of  hot  Rhewms,  Flegm, 
and  the  Hoarfnefs  of  the  Throat,  the  heat  al-  Moarce^^ 
fo,and  fharpnefs  of  Urine,  and  all  pains  of  the  ne[i. 

Back,  or  Reins  and  the  Bladder  :  It  is  good  Throat, 
alfo  for  the  Liver  and  the  Jaundice,  and  in  al  Bacl{, 
hot  Agues  to  cool  the  Heat  and  quench  the  Reins, 
Thirft  ;  But  the  Syrup  of  Violets  is  of  moft  Bladder, 
ufe  and  of  better  cfFeft,  being  taken  in  fomc 
convenient  Liquors  and  if  a  little  of  the 
Juyee  or  Syrup  of  Lemmons  be  put  to  it,  or  a 
few  drops  of  the  Oyl  of  Vitriol,  it  is  made 
thereby  the  more  powerful  to  cool  the  heat  and' 
to  quench  the  Thirft,  and  giveth  to  the  isink' TVirfi, 
a  Clarret  Wine  colour,  and  a  fine  tart  rellifh,  Hwf. 
pleafing  the  taft.  Violets  taken,  or  made  up  ; 

with  Honey  doth  more  elenfe  than  cool,  and 
with  Sugar  contrary-wife.  The  dryed  Flowers 
of  Violets  are  accounted  among  the  Cordial 
Drinks,  Pouders,  and  other  Medicines  efpe-* 
cially  where  cooling  Cordials  are  neceffary  : 

T  t  The 


\ 


77»e  EngUp  ^hyfitian. 


*34 


The  green  Leaves  are  ufed  with  other  Herbs, 
to  make  Plaifters  and  Pcldfccs  for  Infiamati- 
ons  and  Swellings,  and  to  eafe  pains  wherefo- 
ever,  arifing  of  heat,  ^and  for  the  Piles  alfo, 
being  fried  with  Yolks  of  Eggs  and  applied 
thereto. 

Tevfies  orHeartseafe  are  like  unto  Violets 
in  all  their  operations  but  fomwhat  hotter  and 
dryer,  yp.  very  temperate,  and  by  vifcuous 
juyeetherein  doth  fomwhat  mollifie,  yet  lefs 
than  Mallows  :  It  is  conducing  in  like  man¬ 
ner  as  Violets  to  the  hot  Difeafes  of  the  Cheft 
and  Lungs:  for  Agues,  Convulfions,  and  Pal- 
Hng-heknefs  in  Children*  The  Decoftion 
helpeth  Itch  and  Scabs  being  bathed  therwith*. 
It  is  faid  alfo  to  foder  green  Wounds,  and  to 
help  old  Sores,  the  juyee  or  diftilled  Water 
thereof  being  drunk. 

Vipers  Buglofs. 

'Defeription. 

Tills  hath 'many  long  rough  Leaves  lying 
on  the  ground,  from  among  which  rife 
up  diverfe  hard  round  Stalks,  very  rough,  as  if 
they  were  thick  fet  prickles  or  hairs,wher- 
in  arc  fet  fuch  like  long  rough  hairy  or  prickly 
fad  green  Leavs,fomwhat  narrow  5  the  middle 
Rib  for  the  moft  part  being  white.  The  Flo¬ 
wers  ftand  at  the  tops  of  the  Stalks,  branched 
forth  into  many  long  fp iked  Leaves  of  Flow¬ 
ers,  bowing  or  turning  like  the  Turnfole,  all 
ef  them  opening  for  the  moft  part  on  the  one 
fide,  which  are  long  and  hollow,  turning  up 
the  Brims  a  little,  of  a  Purplifh  Violet  colour 
in  them  that  arc  Mly  blown,  but  more  reddifti 
while  they  arc  in  the  Bud,  as  alio  upon  their 
decay  and  withering  i  but  incfomc  places  of  a 
paler  purple  colour,,  with  a  long  pointel  in 
the  middle,  feathered  or  parted  at  the  top : 
After  the  Flowers  are  fallen  the  Seeds  grow¬ 
ing  to  be  ripe,  arc  blackifti, cornered  and  poin- 
red  fomwhat  like  unto  the  Head  of  a  Viper. 
The  Root  is  fomwhat  great  and  blackifti,  and 
woolly,  when  it  groweth  toward  Seed  time  j 
and  periftieth  in  the  Winter. 

There  is  another  fort  little  differing  from 
the  former,  only  in  that  it  beareth  white  Flo¬ 
wers. 

"Place. 

The  firft  groweth  wild  almoft  every  where. 
That  with  white  Flowers,  about  the  Caftlc 
Walls  of  Lewes  in  Sujjex. 

Time. 

They  Flower  in  Summer,  and  their  Seed  is 
rfpe  quickly  after. 

Vermes  and  Vfe. 

VenemoHS  It  is  an  efpccial  Remedy  againft  the  biting 
BeajlSi  of  the  Viper,  and  of  all  other  Venemous 
Feyferii  Bcafts  or  Serpents,  as  alfo  againft  poyfon  and 


poyfonful  Herbs.  "Diofemdes  and  others  fay. 

That  whefoever  ftmll  take  of  the  Herb  or 
Root  before  they  be  bitten,  flaall  not  be  hurt 
by  the  poyfon  of  any  Serpent.  The  Roots  or 
Seeds  are.thought  to  be  moft  effeftual  to  com¬ 
fort  the  Heart,  and  expel  Sadnefs,  orcaufelefs  Heaytf 
Melancholly,  it  tempers  the  Blood,  and  allay-  Sadnefi^ 
eth  the  hot  Fits  of  Agues :  The  Seed  drunk  Melan- 
in  Wineprecureth  abundance  of  Milk  in  Wo-  cholly^ 
mensBrefts.  The  fame  alfo  being  taken  ca-  /igues, 
feth  the  pains  in  the  Loyns,  Back,  and  Kid- 
neys :  The  diftilled  Water  of  the  Herb  when  Leynsy 
it  is  in  Flower,  or  his  chiefeft  ftrength,  is  ex-  Bapy 
cellcnt  to  be  applied  either  inwardly  or  out-  J^dneys. 
wardly  for  all  the  Griefs  aforefaid.  There  is 
a  Syrup  made  hereof  very  effeftual  for  the 
comforting  of  the  Heart,  and  expelling  Sad¬ 
nefs  and  Melancholly. 

■v' w  f  ^  ^  ^  db  db  ?  db  w  db  db 

'I'  al*  ^  “  V  V  V  V  ^  'I*  >7?  ^  jjy  SJT  fp  fp  fjc 

VVall-FIowerS;,  or  Winter 
Gilly-flowers. 

THc  Garden  kinds  are  fo  w?!  known 
that  they  need  no  Defeription. 

DeferiptioH. 

The  common  (ingle  Wall-Flow-' 
ers  which  grow  wild  abroad,  hath  fundry  fmal 
long,  narrow,  and  dark  green  Leaves,  fet 
without  order  upon  fmal  round  whitifti  wood- 
dy  Stalks  which  bear  at  the  tops  diverfe  finglc 
yellow  Flowers  one  above  another,  every  one 
having  four  Leaves  apiece,  and  of  a  very 
fweet  feent ;  after  which  come  long  Pods  con¬ 
taining  reddiih  Seed.  The  Root  is  white, 
hard  and  threddy. 

Place. 

It  groweth  upon  old  Church  Walls,  and 
old  Walls  of  many  Houfes,  and  on  other  ftone 
Walls  in  diverfe  places.  The  other  forts  in 
Gardens  only. 

Time. 

All  the  fingle  kinds  do  Flower  many  times 
in  the  end  of  and  if  the  Winter  be 

mild,  all  the  Winter  long,  but  efpecially  in  the 
Months  of  February y  <lMarch,  and  .April,  and 
until  the  heat  of  the  Spring  do  fpend  them : 

But  the  double  kinds  coiuinue  not  Flowring 
in  that  manner  all  the  yeer  along,  although 
they  Flower  very  early  fomtimes,  and  in  fome 
places  very  late. 

Venues  and  ufe. 

Galen  in  his  fevemh  Book  of  Simple  Me¬ 
dicines  faith,  That  the  yellow  Wall-flowers  Obflrulll- 
worketh  more  powerfully  than  any  of  the  o- ens, 
ther  kinds,  and  is  therefore  of  more  ufe  in  Liver, 
Phyfick  j  It  clenf^th  the  Blood  and  freeth  the  Terms 
Liver  and  Reins  from  Obftrudions’,  proxo-  p/ovol^es, 
keth  Womens  Ccurlesj  expelleth  the  5econ-  Afterbirth 

.  dine 


The  Engltjh  Vhyjttmn. 


Dead  dine  and  dead  Child>  helpcth  the  hardnefs  and 
Childi  pains  of  the  Mother,  and  of  the  Spleen  alfo, 
Spleen,  llayeth  Inflamations  and  Swellings,  comfor- 
teth  and  ftrengthneth  any  weak  part,  or  out  of 
Disjitn-  Joynt :  hclpeth  to  clenfc  the  Eyes  from  mifti- 
ilnre,  nefs  and  Films  on  them,  and  to  clenfe  foul 
Gout>  and  filthy  Ulcers  in  the  Mouth  or  any  other 
Sinews,  part,  and  is  a  fingular  Remedy  for  the  Gout, 
Apoplexy,  and  all  Aches  and  Pains  in  the  Joynts  and  Si- 
Valfty.  news.  A  Conferve  made  of  the  Flowers  is  u- 
fed  for  a  Remedy  both  for  the  Apoplexie  and 
Palfey. 

The  V  Valnut^T  ree. 

'^His  is  fo  well  known,  that  it  needeth  no 
Defeription. 

Time. 

It  BlofTomcth  early,  before  the  Leaves 
come  forth,  and  the  Fruit  is  ripe  in  Septem¬ 
ber. 

Vm  tucs  and,  Vfe. . 

Binds,  The  Bark  of  the  Tree,  doth  bind  and  dry 
Dries,  very  much,  and  the  Leaves  are  much  of  the 
fame  temperature,  but  the  Leaves  when  they 
are  older,  are  heating  and  drying  the  Second 
Degree,  and  harder  of  digeftion  than  when 
they  are  frefti,  which  by  reafon  of  their  fweet- 
nefs  arc  more  pleafing  and  better  digefting  in 
the  Stomach,  and  taken  with  fweet  Wine  they 
move  the  Belly  downwards  j  but  being  old, 
they  grieve  the  Stomach,  and  in  hot  Bodies 
cauife  Choilerto  abound,  and  the  Hcadach, 
and  are  an  enemy  to  thofe  that  have  the 
Cough  :  But  are  Icfs  hurtful  to  thofe  that  have 
colder  Stomachs,  and  arc  faid  to  kill  the 
Worms,  broad  Worms  in  the  Belly  or  Stomach.  If 
they  be  taken  with  Onions,  Salt,  and  Honey, 
they  help  the  biting  of  a  Mad  Dog,  or  the 
1  V  enom  or  infectious  poyfon  of  any  Beaft  &c. 
j  Orum  ’Pompeius  found  in  the  Treafury  of 
.  d^hthridates  Kin^oiVontus,  when  he  was 
overthrown,  a  Scrowl  of  his  own  Hand-wri- 
ting ,  containing  a  Medicine  againft  any 
Poyfon  and  Infedion,  which  is  this:  Take 
two  dry  Walnuts,  and  as  many  good  Figgs, 
and  twenty  Leaves  of  Rue  bruifed  and  beaten 
together  with  two  or  three  Corns  of  Salt,  and 
Toyfort,  twenty  Juniper  Berries,  which  taken  every 
Epiiemi-  morning  failing,  preferveth  from  danger  of 
cd  Difea-  Poyfon  or  Infection,  that  day  it  is  taken.  The 
fes,  Juyee  of  the  outer  green  HHsks,boylcd  up  with 

Jnflamati-  Honey,  is  an  excellent  gargle  for  fore  Mouths, 
m  in  the  the  Heat  and  Inflamations  in  the  Throat  and 
Throat,  Stomach :  The  Kernels  when  they  grow  old 
vpounds  of  are  moreOyly,and  therfore  notf®  fit  to  be 
theSinews  eaten,  but  ar-e  then  ufed  to  heal  the  Wounds  of 
Gangrenes  the  Sinews, Gangrencs,and  Carbuncles  5  The  1 
Carb unties  faid  Kernels  being  burned,  are  then  very  a-  ' 
flux,  ftringent,  and  will  then  ftay  Lasksand  Wo¬ 


mens  Courfes,  being  taken  in  red  Wine  j  ^xidTerms 
ilay  the  falling  of  the.Hair  and  make  it  fair,  {tops, 
being  pointed  with  Oyl  and  Wine  j  Thz  Bddnef, 
green  Husks  wilPdo  the  like  being  ufed  in  the 
fame  manner.  The  Kernels  beaten  with  Rue 
and  Wine,  being  applied,  helpeththe  Quinfiej 
and  bruifed  with  fome  Honey  and  applied  to 
the  Ears,  cafeth  the  pains  and  Inflamations  of 
them  :  A  piece  of  the  green  Husk  put  unto  a 
hollow  T 00th,  eafeth  the  pains.  The  Catkins  Tooth Ach, 
hereof  taken  before  they  fall  off,  dried  and  gi¬ 
ven  a  dram  thereof  in  Pouder  with  white 
Wine,  wonderfully^  helpeth  thofe  that  are 
troubled  with  the  riling  of  the  Mother. 

Oyl  that  is  preffed  out  of  the  Kernels,  is  very 
profitably  taken  inward  like  Oyl  of  Almonds, 
to  help  rhe  Chollick,  and  to  expel  wind  very  ChoUkk, 
effectually,  an  ounce  or  two  thereof  may  be  Wind, 
taken  at  a  time.  The  yong  green  Nuts  taken 
before  they  be  half  ripe  and  preferved  with 
^8^’^^'^re  of  good  ufe  for  thofe  that  have  weak 

n  Ml™? thereon.  The  di- 
nffled  water  of  the  green  Husk  before  they  be 
f  a  of  excellent  ufe  to  cool  th-e  heat 
or  Agues  being  drunk  an  ounce  or  two  at  a  AlWS, 
time,  as  alfo  to  refill  the  Infection  of  the 
1  lague,  if  fome  thereof  be  alfo  applied  to  the 
ores  thereof ;  The  fame  alfo  eoolcth  the  heat 
of  green  Wounds  and  old  Ulcers,  and  healeth 
them  beiag  bathed  therewith  :  The  diftilled 
Husks  being  ripe  when 
they  are  (helled  from  the  Nuts,  being  drunk 
Wit  ^  little  Viijegai'j  is  alfo  found  by  experi- 
ence  to  be  good  for  thofe  that  are  infeCted 
''r  1 fo  as  before  the  taking  ther- 
of  a  Vein  be  opened.  The  faid  Water  is  very 
pOe  againft  the  Quinfin  being  gargled  and 
Mthed  therewith,  and  wonderfully  helpcth 
ea  neft,  the  Noife,  and  other  pains  in  the  np-n../? 
ais.  The  Diftilled  water  of  the  yong  green  ^ 
eaves  in  the  end  of  May  performeth  a  fingu- 

u  ^^cers  and  Sores,  to 

be  bathed  with  wet  Cloathes  or  Spunges  ap¬ 
plied  to  them  evening  and  morning. 

• 

Wold,  Weld,  or  Dyers 
Weed. 

Defeription, 

THe  common  kind  groweth  bulbing  with 
many  Leaves,  long,  narrow,  and  flat  up¬ 
on  the  ground,  of  a  dark,  blewilh,  green  co- 
loiii,  fomwhat  like  untoWoad,  but  nothing 
fo  large,  a  little  crumpled  and  as  it  were  rou||l 
pointed  which  do  fo  abide  the  firft  yCer  :  And 
the  neiu  Spring  from  among  them  rife  diverfe 
lound  Stalks  two  or  three  foot  high,  befet 
with  many  fuch  like  Leaves  thereon,but  fmal- 
ler,  apd  fliooting  forth  fome  final  Blanches, 

^  ^  *  which 


wWch  with  the  Stalks  carry  many  fmal  yellow 
Flowers  in  a  long  fpiked  Head  at  the  tops  of 
them  where  afterwards  come  the  Seed,  which 
■  is  fmall  and  black  inclofed  in  Beads  that  are 
devided  at  the  tops  into  four  parts.  The  Root 
is  long,  white,  and  thick,  abiding  the  Winter: 
The  whol  Herb  changeth  to  be  yellow  after 
it  hath  been  in  Flower  a  while. 

Place- 

It  groweth  every  where  by  the  way  (ides  in 

moiS  grounds  as  well  as  dry,  in  Corners  of 
Fields  and  by  Lanes :  and  fomtimes  ail  over 
the  Field  j  in  SuJJcx  and  l^ent  they  call  it 
Greenweed. 

Time- 

It  is  in  Flower  about  fime- 
Vertues  and  Vfe- 

CMatbioltts  faith ,  That  the  Root  hereof 
Plemy  cutreth  tough  Flegm,  digefteth  raw  Flcgm, 
HumorSj  thinneth  grofs  Humors,  diflblveth  hard  Tu- 
TnjnoYSi  mors,  and  openeth  Obftruftious.  Some  do 
VenetnQHS  highly  commend  it  againlf  the  bitingsofVe- 
PeaftSi  nemous  Creatures,  to  be  taken  inwardly  and 
Pefiilence  applyed  outwardly  to  the  hurt  place  j  as  alfo 
fVorffts.  ^  for  the  Plague  or  Peftilence.  The  People  in 
fome  Countries  of  this  Land  do  ufc  to  bruife 
the  Herb  and  lay  it  to  Cuts  or  W ounds  in  the 
Hands  or  Legs  to  heal  them. 

Wheat. 


on:  The faid Meal boyied  in  Vinegar  hel- 
peth  the  fhrinking  of  the  Sinews  faith  Pliny  i  Sinews^ 
and  mixed  with  Vinegar  and  Honey  boylcd 
I  together,  healeth  all  Freckles,  Spots,  and 
Pimples  on  the  Face.  Wheat  Flower,  mixed 
with  the  Yolk  of  an  Eg,  Honey,  and  T urpen- 
tine,  doth  draw,  clenle,  and  heal,  any  Boyl, 

Plague  Sore,  or  foul  Ulcer.  The  Bran  oi  Peftilence, 
Wheat  Meal  fteeped  in  (harp  Vinegar,  and 
then  bound  in  a  Linnen  Cloth,  and  rubbed 
on  thofe  places,that  have  the  Scurf,Morpbew, 

Scabs, or  Lcprofie,wil  take  them  away,the  Bo- 
dy  being  firit  well  purged  and  prepared.  The 
Decoction  of  the  Bran  of  Wheat  or  Barley, 
is  ofgQod  ufe  to  bath  ihofe  places  that  are 
Burften  by  a  Rupture  t  and  the  faid  Bran  boy- 
led  in  good  Vinegar,  and  appled  to  fwtillen 
Breaftsj  helpeth  them,  and  ftayeth  all  Infla- 
mations  j  it  helpeth  alfo  the  bitings  of  Vi¬ 
pers  fwhich  I  take  to  be  no  other  but  our 
Englifh  Adder)  and  all  other  Venemous  V enemous 
Creatures.  The  Leaves  of  Wheat  Meal  ap- 
plied  with  fome  Salt,  taketh  away  hardnefs  of 
the  Skin,  Wharts ,  and  hard  Knots  in  the 
Flefh.  Starch  moiflned  with  Rofewatcr  and 
laid  to  the  Cods  taketh  away  their  Itching.  ®  " 

Wafers  put  in  Water  and  drunk,  ftayeth  the 
Lask  and  Bloody  Flux,  and  is  profitably  ufed 
both  inward  and  outwardly  for  the  Ruptures 
in  Children:  Boyled  in  Water  unto  a  thick 
Geliy  and  taken,  it  ftayeth  fpitting  of  Blood  ; 
and  boyled  with  Mints  and  Butter  it  helpeth  HoetYce- 
the  hoarfnefs  of  the  Thyoat.  neft- 


Cold, 

Tetters  a 

T^ing- 

vformSi 

VlcerSi 
Chops  in 
the  Hands 
&  feeti 
Mad  Dogs 

EyeSi 


"Kings 
Evil  a 


He  fevcral  kinds  hereof  are  fo  well  known 
unto  almoft  all  people  that  it  is  altogether 
needlefs  to  write  any  Defeription  thereof. 

Vertues  and  ufc. 

Ttiofeorides  faith.  That  to  eat  the  Corns  of 
green  Wheat  is  hurtful  to  the  Stomach,  and 
breedeth  Worms.  Pliny  faith.  That  the 
Corns  of  Wheat  toafted  upon  an  Iron  Pan  and 
eaten,  is  a pleaiant  Remedy  for  thofe  that  are 
chilled  with  cold.  The  Oyl  prefled  from 
Wheat  between  two  thick  flates  of  Iron  or 
Copper  heated,  healeth  all  T etters  and  Ring¬ 
worms  being  ufed  warm,  and  hereby  Galen 
faith  be  hath  known  many  to  be  cured.  -P^a- 
thiolits  commendeth  the  fame  Oyl  to  be  put 
into  hollow  Ulcers  to  heal  them  up,  and  it  is 
alfo  good  for  Chops  in  the  Hands  or  Feet, 
and  to  make  a  rugged  Skin  fmooth. 

The  green  Corns  of  Wheat  being  chewed, and 
applied  to  the  place  bitten  by  a  mad  Dog, hea¬ 
leth  it ;  Slices  of  Wheat  Bread  foaked  in  Red 
Rofe-water,  and  applied  to  the  Eyes  that  arc 
hot,  red,  and  inflamed,  or  blood-lhotten,hel- 
petitthem.  Hot  Bread  applyed  for  an  hour 
at  a  time  three  dales  together,  perfeftly  hea¬ 
leth  the  Kernels  in  the  Throat  commonly  cal¬ 
led  the  Kings  Evil.  The  Flower  of  Wheat 
mixed  with  the  juyee  of  Henbane,  ftayeth  the 
Flux  of  Humors  to  the  J  oynts  being  laid  thcr- 


The  VVillow-trec. 

THcfe  are  fo  well  known  that  they  need  no  . 

no  Defeription :  I  ftiall  therefore  only 
fhew  you  the  V ertucs  thereof. 

Venues  and  vfe. 

Both  the  Leaves,  Bark,  and  the  Seed  are  ufed 
to  ftanch  bleeding  of  Wounds,  and  at  Mouth  Stanch 
andNofe,  fpitting  of  Blood,  and  all  oiher 
Flaxes  of  Blood  in  man  or  womanjand  to  ftay  Spitting  of 
Vomiting,  and  provocation  thereunto,  if  the  Blood, 
Decoftion  of  them  in  Wine  be  drunk.  It  hel-  fluxes  of 
peth  alfo  to  ftay  thin,  hot,  fharp,  fait  Diftilh-  Blood, 
lions  from  the  Head  upon  the  Lungs  caufing  a  Vomiting, 
Confumption  :  The  Leaves  bruifed  with  fome  Diflillati- 
Peppar  and  drunk  in  Wine,  much  helpeth  the  ons  on  the 
wind  Chollick.  The  Leaves  bruifed  and  boy-  Lungs, 
l&d  in  Wine  and  drunk  ftaieth  the  heat  of  Luft  myid 
in  man  or  woman,  and  quite  extinguiflieth  it,  choUicl^, 
if  it  be  long  ufedj  The  Seed  is  mfo  of  theff^^f 
fame  effect.  The  Water  that  is  gathered  from  Lu(i, 
the  Willow  when  it  Flowreth,  the  Bark  being  Dm„ef  of 
flit,  and  a  fitting  Veflel  fet  to  receive  it,  is  yc- fight,  & 
ry  good  for  rednefs  and  dimnefs  of  Sight,  for  other  Dif- 
filmsthat  grow  over  the  Eyes,  and  ftay  thefay^j 
Rhewms  that  fall  into  them,  to  provoke  Urin  the  Eyes, 

being 


I 


The  Englijh  Thyjttian. 


^7, 


Cleer  the 

I'accj 

Dry 

BumoiS, 


being  flopped  if  it  be  drunk,  and  to  clccr  the 
Face  and  Skin  from  Spots  and  Difcolouriugs. 
Galen  faith.  The  Flowers  have  an  admirable 
faculty  ill  drying  up  Humors,  beeing  a  Medi¬ 
cine  without  any  fharpnefs  or  cocroflon  :  You 
may  boyl  them  in  white  Wine,  and  drink  as 
much  as  you  will  (fo  you  drink  not  yqur  fclf 
drunk.)  The  Bark  work  the  fame  effedfs,  if 
ufed  in  the  fame  manner,  and  the  Tree  hath 
alwaies  Bark  upon  it  though  not  alwaics  Flo- 
The  Burnt  afties  of  the  Bark,  being 


wers 


H'arts, 
Corns  & 
fufcrflii- 
ous  fie  fhy 
Scurf  tff 
Vandrijf" 

Feaveco. 


mixed  with  Vinegar  taketh  away  Warts, 
Corns,  and  Superfluous  Flefti  being  applied 
to  the  place.  The  Decodion  of  the  Leaves 
or  Bark  in  Wine,  takes  away  Scurf  or  E^mdrif 
by  waftiing  the  place  with  it :  ’Tis  a  fine  cool 
Tree,  The  Boughs  of  which  are  very  conve¬ 
nient  to  be  placed  in  the  Chamber  of  one  fick 
of  aFeaver. 

Woad. 

T)efcriptio?i’ 

IT  hath  diverfe  large  Leaves,  long,and  fom- 
what  broad  withal,  like  to  thofe  of  the 
greater  Plantane,  but  larger,  thicker,  of  a  gree- 
nifti  colour  and  fomwhat  blew  withal :  From 
among  which  Leaves  rifeth  up  a  lufly  Stalk 
three  or  four  foot  high,  with  diverfe  Leaves 
fet  thereon;  The  higher  the  Stalk  rifeth,  the 
fmaller  are  the  Leaves,  at  the  top  it  fpreadeth 
into  diverfe  Branches,  at  the  ends  of  which 
appear  pretty  little  yellow  Flowers,  and  after 
they  pafs  away  like  other  Flowers  of  the  Field, 
come  Husks,  long,  and  fomwhat  flat  withal,  in 
form  they  referable  a  T ongue,  in  colour  they 
are  black,  and  they  hang  bobbing  downwards. 
The  Seed  contained  within  thefe  Husks  fifit 
be  a  little  chewed)  gives  an  Azure  coloiir.The 
Root  is  white  and  long. 

Place-. 

It  is  fowed  in  Fields  for  the  benefit  of  it, 
where  thofe  that  fow  it  cut  it  three  times  a 
yeer. 

Time. 

It  Flowrcth  in  June,  but  is  long  after  before 
the  Seed  is  ripe. 

Venues  and  ufe.  , 

Some  People  affirm  the  Plant  to  be  deflru- 
dive  to  Bees,  which  if  it  be  I  cannot  help  it ; 
They  fay  it  poflefieth  Bees  with  a  Flux,  but 
that  I  can  hardly  bclceye,  unlels  Bees  be  con¬ 
trary  to  all  other  Creatures,  I  fliould  rather 
think  it  poffefleth  them  with  the  contrary  Dif- 
eafe,  the  Herb  being  exceeding  drying  and 
binding.  However,  if  any  Bees  be  difeafed 
thereby,  the  cure  is  to  fet  Urine  by  them,  but 
fetitinfucha  Veflel  that  they  cannot  drown 
ihemfelvcs,  which  may  be  remedied  if  you 
put  pieces  of  Cork  in  it.  I  cold  you  before 


the  Herb  was  drying  and  binding,  and  fo  dry¬ 
ing  and  binding  that  it  is  not  fit  to  be  given 
inwardly.  An  Oyntment  made  thereof  flan- 
cheth  Bleeding  :  A  Plaifler  made  thereof  and  Bleeding 
applied  to  the  Region  of  the  Spleen  (and  I  spleen, 
pray  you  take  notiGe,that  the  Spleen  lies  on  the  ^li^ers 
left  fide)  takes  away  the  hardnefs  and  pains 
rhercof :  The  Oyntment  is  excellent  good  in 
fuch  Ulcers  as  abound  with  moiflure,  and  Antho- 
takes  away’fthe  corroding  and  fretting  '^\x-nies fire 
mors  :  It  cools  Inflamations,  quencheth  St.  defluxiens 
Anthonies  fire ,  and  flaycth  Cefluxions  of  of  Blood.. 
Blood  to  any  part  of  the  Body. 

Woodbind^  or  Honey- 
fiickles. 

THe  Plant  is  fo  common  that  every  one 
that  hath  Eyes  knows  them,  and  he  that 
hath  none  cannot  reade  a  Defeription  if 
I  fliould  write  it. 

Time. 

They  Flo-wer  in  June,  and  the  Fruit  is  ripe 
in  .Augufi. 

Venues  and  ufe. 

Dodtor  Tradition,  that  grand  Introducer  of 
Errors,  that  Hater  of  Truth,  that  Lover  of 
Folly,and  that  mortal  Foe  to  Dodor  T^eafon, 
hath  taught  the  common  People  to  ufe  the 
Leaves  and  Flowers  of  this  Plant  in  Mouth 
Waters,  and  by  long  continuance  of  time  hath 
fo  grounded  it  in  the  Brains  of  the  Vulgar 
that  you  cannot  beat  it  out  with  a  Beetle:  All 
Mouth  Waters  ought  to  be  cooling  and  dry¬ 
ing, but  Honey juclfies  are  clenfing,confuming, 
and  digefiing,  and  therefore  no  waies  fit  for 
Inflamations,  Thus  Doctor  Reafon.  Again, 

If  you  pleafe  we  will  leave  Dr.  Reafon  a  while 
and  come  to  Dr.  Experience,  a  learned  Gentle¬ 
man,  and  his  Brother  5  Take  a  Leaf  and 
chew  it  in  your  Mouth,  and  you  will  quickly  , 
find  it  likelier  to  caufe  a  fore  Mouth  orThroat 
than  to  cure  it.  Well  then,  if  it  be  not  good 
for  this.  What  is  it  good  for  ?  ’Tis  good  for 
fomthing :  For  God  and  Nature  made  no¬ 
thing  in  vain  ;  It  is  an  Herb  of  Jupiter  and 
apropriated  to  the  Lungs,  the  Cceleftial  Crab  ^^^.^ 
claims  Dominion  over  it  ;  neither  is  it  a  Foe  —  -  -  ■* 


fli£ied 


to  the  Lyon  :  If  the  Lungs  be  afflided  by 
Mercury,  this  is  your  Cure:  It  is  fitting  Oi  spleen 
Conferve  made  of  the  Flowers  of  it  were  kept  pygTjgLgg 
in  every  Gentlewomans  Houfe  J  I  know  no 
better  cure  for  an  Aflhma  than  this  j  Befides, 

It  takes  away  the  evil  of  the  Spleen,  provokes 
Urine,  procures  fpeedy  Delivery  to  Women  rhiMhireU 
in  i  ravail,  helps  Cramps,  Convulfions  and  cramps 
Palfeys,  and  whatfoever  griefs  comes  of  cold  ceiwJulR.. 
or  flopping  :  If  you  pleafe  to  make  ufe  of  it  in  ' 

an  Oyntment,  it  will  clecr  your  Skin  of  Mor-  jy lifers 
U  u  phew,  ^  ^ 


The  Englijh  fhyfitm. 


Freckles  phcWjrrecklc$,and  Sunburnicgj  or  whatfocva 
&  S«a-  difcolours  it,  and  then  the  Maids  will 

immi.  lov,eit.  I  have  done,  when  1  have  told  you 
what  Authors  fay,  and  cavelled  a  little  with 
them.  They  fay  the  hlowers  arc  of  more  effe^l 
thah  the  Leaves,  and  that’s  true  J  but  they  fay. 
The  Seeds  are  of  leaf!  of  all:  But  Dr. 
Ft&^on  told  me,  Thai  there  was  a  Vital  Spirit 
in  every  Seed  to  beget  its  like  ;  and  Dr.  £*- 
ferietjse  told  me.  That  there  was  a  greater  heat 
in  a  Seed  than  there  was  in  any  other  part  of 
a  Plant,  and  withal.  That  Hoat  was  the  Mo¬ 
ther  of  adion,  and  then  judg  if  old  Dr.  Tra- 
dition  (who  may  well  be  honor’d  for  his  Age, 
but  npt  for  his  Goodnefs)  have  not  fo  poyfo- 
ned  the  World  with  his  Errors  before  I  was 
born,  that  it  was  never  well  in  its  wits  fin^e, 

•  and  there  is  great  fear  it  will  die  mad. 

4?  4?  4i?  ^  ^  ^  4?  4^  4“  4?  •  ^  ^  ^ 

Woimwpod. 

Defeription- 

THree  nwmwoeds  are  familiar  with  us ; 

One  I  (hall  not  deferabe,  another  I  fliall 
deferibe,  and  the  Third  be  Critical  at.  And 
I  care  not  greatly  if  I  begin  with  the  laft 
firft. 

Sea  wormwood  hath  gotten  as  many  Names 
as  Vertues  (and  perhaps  one  more)  Seriphiorii 
Smtonicon,  Selgkumi  '^ai'bonenje,  Xantomi- 
ttmii  Mfnenfe^  and  a  matter  of  twenty  more, 
which  I  will  not  blot  Paper  withal ;  A  Papift 
got  the  Toy  by  the  end,  and  he  called  it  Holy 
Wormwood  i  and  in  truth  I  am  of  Opinion, 
Their  giving  fo  much  holinefsto  Herbs  is  the 
Reafon  there  remains  fo  little  in  themfelves. 

Tht  Seed  of  this  Wormwood  is  that  which 
ufually  Women  give  their  Children  for  the 
Worms :  Of  all  wormwoods  that  grow  here, 
this  is  the  weakeft  j  I  but  Doftors  commend 
it,  and  Apothecaries  fell  it,  the  one  muft  keep 
bis  Credit,  and  the  other  get  Money,  and 
that’s  the  key  of  the  work.  The  Herb  is  good 
for  fomthing,  becaufe  God  made  nothing  in 
vain  J  Will  yOu  give  me  leave  to  weigh  things 
in  the  Ballanee  of  Reafon }  Then  thus,  The 
Seeds  of  the  cOpmonWormwood  arc  far  more 
^  prevalent  than  the  Seed  of  this,  to  expell 
'Worms  in  Children,  or  People  of  ripe  age; 
Of  both,  fomc  are  weak,  fome  are  ftrong. 
The  SeriphiarW oxmfetd  is  the  weakeft, &hap' 
pily  may  prove  to  be  fitteft  for  weakeft  Bodies 
(^for  it  is  weak  enough  in  all  confcience J  Let 
fuchasarc  ftrong  take  the  common  Worm- 
feed,  for  the  other  will  do  but  little  good.  A- 
eain ,  neer  the  Sea  many  people  live ,  and 
Seriphium  grows  neer  them,  and  therfore  is 
more  fitting  for  their  Bodies  becaufe  nouri- 
ftied  by  the  fame  Air  J  and  this  I  had  from 
Dr.  T^afqn-  In  whofe  Body  'DyT^eafon  dwels 


not,  dwels  Dt.Madntf^y  and  he  brings  in  his 
Brethren,  Dr.  Ignorance,  Dr.  Folly,  and  Dr. 
Siclinefs,  and  thefe  together  make  way  for  Dr, 
'Death,  and  the  latter  end  of  that  man  is  worfe 
than  the  beginning.  Pride  was  the  caufc  of 
>yideim'sFm,  Pride  begate a  Daughter,  Ido 
not  know  the  Father  of  it  unlefs  the  Divil,  bur 
ftic  chriflned  it,  and  call’d  it  appetite,  and 
fent  her  Daughter  to  taft  thefe  Wormwoods, 
who  finding  this  the  leaft  bitter,  made  the 
fqeamifti  Wench  extol  it  to  the  Skies,  though 
the  Vertues  of  it  never  reached  to  the  middle 
Region  of  the  Air.  Its  due  praife  is  this  j  It 
is  wc;(Jteft,  therefore  fitter  for  weak  Bodies, 
and  fitter  for  thofe  Bodies  that  dwell  neer  it 
than  thofe  that  live  far  from  it :  my  reafon  is. 
The  Sea  (as  thofe  that  live  far  ftom  it,  know 
when  they  comt  neer  it)  cafteth  not  fuch  a 
fmel  as  the  Land  doth :  The  tender  Mercies 
of  God  being  over  all  his  Works,  hath  by  his 
eternal  Providence  planted  Seriphium  by  the 
Sea  fide,  as  a  fit  Medicine  for  the  Bodies  of 
thofe  that  live  neer  it.  Laftly,  It  is  known 
to  all  that  know  any  thing  in  the  Courfe  of 
Nature ,  That  the  Liver  delights  in  fweet 
things,  if  fo,  it  abhors  bitter  j  then  if  your 
Liver  be  weak,  it  is  none  of  the  wifeft  courfes 
to  plague  it  with  an  Enemy  ;  if  the  Liver  be 
weak,  a  Confumption  follows  ;  Would  you 
know  the  Reafon  ?  ’tis  this,  A  mans  Flefh  is 
repaired  by  Blood ,  by  a  third  concoftion 
which  tranfmutes  Blood  into  Flefti  (’tis  well  I 
faid  [Condiou]  for  if  I  had  faid  [Boyling] 
every  Cook  would  have  underftood  me.)  The 
Liver  makesBlood,and  if  it  be  weakned  that  ft 
makes  not  enough  the  Flclh  wafteth,  and  why 
muft  Flefh  alwaies  be  renewed  ?  Becaufe  the 
eternal  God  when  he  made  the  Crcation,made 
one  part  of  it  in  continual  dependency  upon 
another  :  And  why  did  he  fo  ?  Becaufe  Him- 
felf  is  only  Permanent,  to  teach  us,  That  we 
fhould  not  fix  eur  affedions  itpon  what  is 
tranfitory,  but  upon  what  endures  for  ever. 
The  rcfult  of  all  is  this.  If  the  Liver  be  weak 
and  cannot  make  Blood  enonough  (I  would 
have  faid  [Sanguifie]  if  1  had  written  only  to 
Schollers)  The  Sertphian  which  is  the  weakeft 
of  Wormwoods  is  better  than  the  beft.  1 
have  been  Critical  enonough  (if  not  too 
much. 

Flace. 

It  grows  familiarly  in  EngUnd  by  the  Sea 
fide. 

*  Deferipaion. 

It  ftarts  up  out  of  the  oarth  with  many  round 
woody  hoary  Stalks  from  one  Root,  its  hekhx 
is  four  foot  high,  or  three  at  the  leaft.  The 
Leaves  in  Longitude  arc  long,  in  Latitude 
narrow,  in  Colour  white,  in  Form  hoary,  in 
Similitude  like  Southernwood,  only  broader 
and  longer,  in  Taft,  rather  £ak  than  bitter, 
becaufe  k  grows  fo  neer  the  Salt  Water :  At 
the  joynts  with  the  Leaves  toward  the  tops  it 

bears 


ChoUer, 

Feneryj 


Ti'ove\es 

Vrinc, 

Helps 

Surfets, 

Swellings, 

Appetite 

loft, 

Telloow 

Jaundice, 


Treferve 

Health, 


bears  little  yellow  Flowers.  The  Root  lies 
deep  and  is  woody. 

Common  Wormwood  I  iball  not  deferibe, 
for  every  Boy  that  can  eat  an  Eg  knows  it. 

Komane  wormwood  ’,  And  why  Komane,(tt- 
ing  it  grows  familiarly  in  England  ?  It  may 
be  it  wasfo  called  becaufe  ’tis  fpecial  good  for 
a  {linking  Breath,  which  the  Romans  cannot 
be  very  free  from  maintaining  fo  many  Bandy 
Houfes  by  Authority  of  hisHolinefs. 

Deferiptim. 

The  Stalks  are  flcnderer  and  fliorter  than 
the  common  wormwood  by  one  foot  at  leailj 
the  Leaves  are  more  finely  cut  and  devided 
than  they  are  but  fomthing  fmaller^j  both 
Leaves  and  Stalks  are  hoary  -,  the  Flowers  of 
a  pale  yellow  colour,  it  is  altogether  like  the 
common  Womwood, lave  only  in  bignefs/or 
’tisfmalle;  j  in  tail,  for ’tis  not  fo  bitter,  in 
fmell,{0r  itisfpicy. 

Place. 

It  grow'eth  upon  the  tops  of  the  Mountains 
(itfeems  ’tis  afpiring)  there  ’tis  Naturals 
but  ufuaJly  nurfed  up  in  Gardens  for  the  ufe  of 
the  Apothecaries  in  London. 

Time. 

All  Wormwoods  ufually  Flower  in  Augufl, 
a  little  fooner  or  later. 

Vertues  and  Ufe. 

Will  you  give  me  leave  to  be  Critical  a  lit¬ 
tle  ?  I  mnil  take  leave  5  Wormwood  is  an 
Herb  of  Mars,  and  if  Pontanm  fay  otherwife 
he  is  befide  the  Bridg.  I  prove  it  thus ;  What 
delights  in  Martial  places  is  a  Martial  Herb, 
But  Wormwood  delights  in  Martial  places, 
(for  about  Forges  and  Iron  Works  you  may 
gather  a  Cart  load  of  it)  Ergo  it  is  a  Martial 
Herb.  It  is  hot  and  dry  in  the  firft  degree, 
Vi\,  Juft  as  hot  as  your  Blood  and  no  hotter: 
It  remedies  the  evils  Choller  can  inflid  on 
the  Body  of  man  by  Sympathy.  It  helps  the 
evils  Vmm  and  her  wanton  Girls  produce,  by 
Antipathy  j  and  it  doth  fomthing  elfe  befides. 
It  clenfeth  the  Body  of  Choller  fand  who 
dares  fay  Mars  doth  no  good  )  It  provokes 
Urine,  helps  Surfets,  Swellings  in  the  Belly  j 
it  caufeth  an  Appetite  tomcat,  becaufe  Mars 
rules  the  Auradive  faculty  in  Man  ;  The 
Sun  never  ftioncupon  a  better  Herb  for  the 
yellow  Jaundice  than  this  is:  Why  fliould 
men  cry  out  fo  much  upon  Mars  for  an  Infor- 
tue  (or  Saturn  either  ?)  Did  God  make  Crea¬ 
tures  to  do  the  Creation  a  mifehief  ?  This 
Herb  teftifies  that  iWa'c’s  is  willing  to  cure  all 
the  Difeafes  he  caufes  j  the  truth  is,  Mars 
loves  no  Cowards,  nor  Saturn  Fools,  nor  I, 
either.  T ake  of  the  Flowers  of  Wormwood, 
Rofemaiy,  and  black  Thorn,  of  each  a  like 
quantity,  half  that  quantity  of  Saftron,  boyl 
this  in  Rcnilli  Wine,  but  put  not  in  the  Saf¬ 
fron  till  it  is  almoft  boyled  ’,  This  is  the  way 
to  keep  a  Mans  Body  in  health,  appointed  by 
Carnerarrim  in  his  Book  intituled,  Hortus  Me- 


dicus,  and  ’tis  a  good  one  to®.  Befides  all 
this ,  VVormwood  provokes  the  Terms.  I  Terris  =• 
'y°“*‘^jy*^Ji”g*y^5®5hAftrol0gers,  and  make 
them  Phyfitians(iflkncwhow)  for  they  arc 
moil  fitting  for  the  Calling,  if  yon  will  not 
btleeve  me,  ask  Dr.  Hippocrates,  and  Dr. 

Gfl/cM,  a  couple  of  Gentlemen  that  our  Col- 
ledgofPhyfitians  keep  to  vapor  with,  not  to 
follow.  In  this  one  Herb  I  (hall  give  the  Pat¬ 
tern  of  a  Rule  to  the  Sons  of  Art,  rough  eaft, 
yet  as  necr  the  Truth  as  the  men  of  Benjamin 
could  throw  a  ftone  3  whereby  my  Brethren 
of  the  Society  of  Aftrologcrs  may  know  by  a 
penny  how  a  {hilling  is  coyned  :  (as  for  the 
Colledg  of  Phyfitians  they  are  too  ftatcly  to 
learn,  and  too  proud  to  continue,  They  fay 
a  Moufe  is  under  the  Dominion  of  the  Moon^ 
and  that’s  the  reafon  they  feed  in  the  night : 

The  Houfe  of  the  dMtion  is  Cancer  :  (Rats  are 
of  the  fame  narure  with  Mice  but  that  they  arc 
a  little  bigger.)  Mars  receives  his  fall  in  Can¬ 
cer,  Ergo  Wormwood  being  asiHeth  of  Mars  .. 

is  a  prefem  Remedy  for  the  biting  of  Rats  and 
Mice.  Mufliroms  (I  cannot  give  them  the^'*.^^'^ 
title  of  Herba,Etutex,  or  Arbor)  arc  under  the 
Dominion  of  Saturn  (and  take  them  one 
time  with  another  they  do  as  much  harm  as 
good  :)  if  any  have  poyfon’d  himfelf  by  ea¬ 
ting  them.  Wormwood  an  Herb  of  Mars  cures  Mufkromi 
him,  becaufe  Mars  is  exalted  in  Capricorn  the 
Houfof  Samn,&i  this  it  doth  by  Sympathy  as 
it  did  the  other  byAntipaihy.  Wheals,pH{he8,  wheals; 
black&  blew  Spots  coming  eitheir  by  bruifes  or  Pujhes, 
beatings,Wormwood an  Herb  oiMars  hdp^Blac\& 
becauli>f/in(as  bad  as  you  love  him,&  as  ill  as  blew 
you  hate  him)  will  not  break  your  Head,  but  Spots, 
he’l  give  you  a  Plaifter.  If  he  do  but  teach 
you  to  know  your  felvcs ,  his  Courtelic  is 
greater  than  his  Difcourtefic :  The  greateft 
Antipathy  between  the  Planets  is  fctween 
Mai  s  ind  Femes,  one  is  hot,  the  other  cold, 

one  Diurnal,  the  other  Noamnal  5  one  dry, 

the  other  moift,  their  Houfes  arc  oppolite, 
one  Mafculinc  the  other  Feminine,  one  pubs 
lick  the  other  private,  one  is  valiant,  the  other 
effeminate ,  one  loves  the  light,  the  other 
hates  it,  one  loves  the  Field,  the  other  the 
Sheets  3  then  the  Throat  is  under  Venus,  the 
Quinfie  lies  in  the  Throat  and  is  an  Inflama- 
tion  there  ;  Venus  rules  the  Throat  (it  being 
mdev  Taurus  her  Sign)  Mars  eradicates  all 
Difeafes  in  theThroat  by  his  Herbs  (of  which 
Wormwood  is  one)  and  fend  them  to  tyEgypt 
on  an  errand  never  to  return  more  5  this  by 
Antipathy.  The  Eyes  are  under  the  Lumina¬ 
ries,  the  right  Eye  of  a  Man,  and  the  left  Eye 
of  a  Woman,  the  Sun  claims  Dominion  over  : 

The  left  Eye  of  a  Man,  and  the  right  Eye  of  a 
Woman,  are  the  priviledg  of  the  Moon,^^^^^ 
Wormwood  an  Herb  of  Mars  cures  both  ! 

What  belongs  to  the  Sun  by  Sympathy  becauf 
lie  is  exalted  in  his  Houfe  5  but  what  belongs 
to  the  Moon  by  Antipathy,  becaufe  he  hath 
LI  u  i  his 


240 


his  ¥aU  in  hevs.  Suppofe  a  man  be  bitten  or 

Bitiw*  or'*>  ftung  by  a  martial  Crcaturcj  imagine  a  W  afp^ 

rtingm  L  aHornetorScorpionjWorrawoodanHerbof 

VenemoHs  Mars  you  a  pvelent  cure:  Then  Mars 

BeaSs.  as  Ch.oUerick  as  he  is,  hath  learned  that  Pa¬ 
tience,  to  pafs  by  yenr  evil  fpeeches  or  him, 
and  tells  you  by  my  Pen,  That  he  gives  you 
no  Affliaionbiithcgivesyou  a  Cures  You 
need  net  run  to  Apollo  nor  o£[culapim  5  and 
if  he  were  fo  Cbollerick  as  you  make  him  to 
he,  he  would  have  drawn  his  Sword  for  Anger 
to  fee  the' ill  conditions  of  thofe  people  that 
can  fpy  his  Vices  and  not  his  Vertues. 

The  eterni  God  when  he  made  Marsy  made 
Jjjjjt  for  a  publick  good,  and  the  Sons  of  Men 
fhall  kiiow  it  in  the  latter  end  of  the  world. 

Mars  folU/S  habet.  You  fay  Mars 
is  aDcftroyer,  mix  a  little  Wormwood  an 
Herb  o(<^ars  with  your  Ink,  and  neither 
Rats  nor  Mice  will  touch  the  Paper  is  written 
wthit,  and  then  <^ars  is  a  Preferver.  A- 
Urologcrs  fay  tMars  caufeth  Scabs  and  Itch, 
and  the  Virgins  are  angry  with  him,  becaufe 
wanton  Vtnm  told  them  he  deforms  their 
Skin  :  But  quoth  Marsy  my  only  defne  is 
they  fbould  know  themfelves  J  my  Herb 
^VormwGod  will  reftore  them  to  the  beauty 
ehey  formerly  had, and  in  that  I  will  not  come 
an  inch  behind  my  oppoCte  F enns  J  for  which 
doth  the  greateft  evil,  he  that  takes  away  an 
annate  beauty,  and  when  he  hath  done  knows 
how  to  reftore  it  again  ;  or  fhethat  teaches  a 

company  of  wanton  Laftes  to  paint  their  Pa¬ 
ces  ?  If  Mars  be  in  the  Virgin  in  a  Nativi¬ 
ty  they  fety  he  ufually  caufeth  the  Chollick 
Ctis  well  God  hath  fet  feme  body  to  pul  down 
the  Pride  of  Man)  He  in  the  Virgin  troubles 
none  w'*’the  Chollick  but  them  that  know  not 
themfelves  (  for  who  knows  himfelf  may  wfily 
know  all  the  world:)  Wormwood  an  Herb 
of  Mars  is  a  prefent  cure  for  it :  and  whether 
it  be  moft  like  a  Chriftian  to  love  him  for  his 
good,  or  hate  him  for  his  evil,  judg  ye.  I 
nad  almoft  forgotten  that  Charity  thinks  no 
evil,  I  was  once- in  the  Tower  and  viewed  the 
Wardrobe,  and  there  was  a  great  many  fmc 
Cloathes  (I  can  give  them  no  other  title,  for 
1  was  never  neither  Linnen  or  Woollen  I^a- 
per)  yet  as  brave  as  they  looked,  my  opinion 
was,  the  Meaths  might  confume  them  (yea 
Henry  the  eighth  his  Codpiece.)  Moaths  aie 
under  the  Dominion  of  Mars ,  Ins  Herb 
Wormwood  being  laid  amongft  Cloath^ 
will  make  a  Moath  fcorn  to  meddle  with  the 
Cloath,  as  much  as  a  Lyon  fcorns  to  medme 
with  a  Moufe,  or  an  Eagle  a  Ply-  You  fay 
Jrlars  is  angry,  and  'tis  true  enough,  he  is 
angry  with  my  Countty-men  for  being  fuca 
Pools  to  be  led  by  the  Nofes  by  a  Colledg  of 
Fhyfitians,  as  they  lead  Bears  to  Taris-Gat- 
dm.  Melancholly  men  cannot  endure  to  be 
>  wrong’d  in  point  of  good  name,  and  that  , 
hath  iorely  troubled  old  Saturn}  becaufe  they 


called  him  the  greateft  Inforiune :  In  the  Bo¬ 
dy  of  Man  he  rules  the  Spleen  (  and  that 
makes  Covetous  men  fo  Splenetick.)  The 
poor  old  man  lies  crying  out  of  his  left  fide, 

Father  Satwrn’s  angry.  Mars  comes  to  him, 
come  Brother,  Icenfefs  thou  art  evil  fpoken 
of,  and  fo  am  I,  thou  knoweft  I  have  my  ex-Sp/eew, 
altaticn  in  thy  Houfe,  I’le  give  him  an  Herb 

of  mine.  Wormwood,  to  cure  the  poor  mans 
confentedjburfpokebut  little,  and  fo 
Mars  cured  him  by  Sympathy.  When  >Mars 
was  free  from  War  (tor  he  loves  to  be  figh¬ 
ting,  and  is  the  beft  friend  a  Soldier  hath) 

I  fay  when  Afars  was  free  from  War  he  cal¬ 
led  a  Cnuncel  of  War. in  his  own  Brain  to 
know  how  he  fhould  do  poor  Cnful  man  good, 
(defiring  to  forget  his  abufes  in  being  called 
an  Infortune)  He  mufters  up  his  own  Forces 
and  places  them  in  Battalia,  Oh,  quoth  he, 
why  do  I  hurt  a  poor  filly  Man  or  Woman? 

His  Angel  Anfwcrs  him,  ’Tis  becaufe  they  . 
have  oftended  their  God  L  Look  back  to 
Mdanq  Well,faics  though  they  fpeak 

evil  of  me,  I’le  do  good  to  them  j  Death’s 
cold,  my  Herbs  fhall  heat  them.  They  are 
full  of  illHumors  (elfethcy  would  never  have 
fpoken  ill  of  me)  my  Herb  fhall  clenfe  them 
and  dry  them  :  They  are  poor  weak  Creatures, 
my  Herb  fhall  ftrenethen  them  ;  they  are  dul 
witted,my  Herb  fhall  fortifie  th^ir  Apprehen- 
fionsj  and  yet  amongft  AftrologeiSj  all  this 

doth  not  deferve  a  good  word  j  Oh,  the  Pati¬ 
ence  of  CM  ars» 

Falix  qui  potult  rcrum  cegnofeere  caufas 
Inque  dofnm  fuperum  jeandtre  curafuiu 

Oh  happy  he  that  can  the  Know/edgga'm}  _ 

To  Itncrv  tFctc'ival  God  made  nought tn  vdm~ 

To  this  I  add, 

I  linora  the  reajon  caufeth  fuch  a  Dearth 
Of  l^nowledgftisjbecauf  men  love  the  Soith- 

The  other  day  Mars  told  me  he  met  with 
FenuS}  and  he  asked  her  what  the  Reafen  was 
that  fhc  accufed  him  for  abufing  Wemen,  he 
never  gave  them  the  Pcx,  in  the  Difpute  they 
fell  out,  and  in  anger  parted,  and  Mars  told 
me  that  his  brother  told  him,  that  an 

Antivenerial  Medicine  was  the  beft  againft 
the  Pox.  Once  a  Month  he  meets  with  the 
Mtwny  Mm  is  quick  enough  of  fteech,  and^^''^ 
the  Moon  not  much  behind  hand  (neither  are 
moft  Women)  The  Moon  looks  much  after 
Children,  and  Children  arc  much  troubled 
with  the  Worms ,  fhe  defired  a  Medicine 
of  him,  he  bad  her  take  his  own  Herb  Worm¬ 
wood  :  He  had  ne  fooncr  parted  with  the 
Moon  but  he  met  with  Fenus,  and  flie  was  as 
drunk  as  a  Bitch,  Alas  poor  Fcnm  quoth  he. 

What,  thou  a  Fortune  and  be  drunk  ?  Pic 
give  thee  an  Antipathetical  Cure,  take  my 
Herb  Worm.wood,  thou  flralt  never  get  a 

Surfet 


241 


Surfety 


Stml(ing 

Breath} 


DftU 

Brain} 

Tveali 

Sight. 


Surfet  by  drinking.  A  poor  filly  Country¬ 
man  hath  got  an  Ague  and  cannot  go  about 
his  bufinefs,  he  wiflies  he  had  it  not,  and  fo 
do  I,  but  I’le  tell  him  a  Remedy  whereby  he 
may  prevent  it.  Take  the  Herb  of  Marrs 
Wormwood,  and  if  Infortunes  will  do  good 
what  will  Fortunes  do  ?  Some  fay  the  Lungs 
are  under  Jupiter,  and  if  the  Lungs,  then  the 
breath,  and  yet  a  man  fomtimes  gets  a  ftin- 
king  breath,  and  yet  Jupiter  is  a  Fortune 
forfboth ;  up  comes  Mars  to  him ,  Come 
B'-other/«pito“,  thouknoweft  I  fent  thee  a 
couple  of  Trines  to  thy  Houfes  laft  night,  the 
one  from  Aries,  and  the  other  from  Scorpio, 
give  me  thy  leave  by  Sympathy  to  cure  the 
poor  man  by  drinking  a  draught  of  Worm¬ 
wood  Beer  every  morning.  The  Moon  was 
weak  the  other  day,  and  fhe  gave  a  man  two 
terrible  mifehiefs,  a  dull  Brain,  and  a  weak 
fight,  >!Mars  laics  by  his  Sword  and  comes  to 
her ,  Sifter  <!Moon  faith  he.  This  man  hath 
anper’d  thee,  but  1  befeech  thee  take  notice  he 
is  but  a  Fool,  prithee  be  patient,  I  will  with 
my  Herb  ivormwaod  cure  him  of  both  Infir¬ 
mities  by  Antipathy,  for  thou  knowft,  thou 
and  I  cannot  agree  j  with  that  the  Moon  began 
to  quarrel ;  Mars  (not  delighting  much  in 
Womens  Torigues^  went  away>  and  did  it 
whether  (he  would  or  no. 

He  that  rcades  this  and  underftands  what  he 
rcades,  he  hath  a  Jewel  more  worth  th^  a  Di¬ 
amond  ;  He  that  undeiftands  it  not,  is  as  lit¬ 
tle  fit  to  give  Phyfick.  There  lies  a  Key  in 
thefc  words,  which  will  unlock  (if  it  be  turned 
by  a  wife  hand)  the  Cabbinet  ofTPhyficli :  I 
have  delivered  it  fo  plainly  as  I  durftj  ’tis  not 
upou  Wormwood  only  that  I  wrote,  but  upon 
all  Plants,  Trees,  and  Herbs  :  He  that  undei'^ 
ftands  it  not, is  unfit  (in  my  Opinion)  to  give 
Phyfick.  Thisfhall  live  when  lam  dead  j 
and  thus  1  leave  it  to  the  World,  not  caring  a 
Halfpenny  whether  they  like  or  diflike  it.  The 
Grave  equals  all  men,  and  therefore  ihali  c- 
qual  me  with  the  Princes,  until  which  time 
the  Eternal  Providence  is  over  mej  then  the 
ill  tongue  of  a  pratling  Prieft,  or  of  one  who 
hath  more  Tongue  than  Wit,  or  more  Pride 


than  Honefty,  ftiall  never'f'ouble  me.  Wifi- 
dotn  is  juftified  ot  her  Children ,  andfo  much 
for  Wormwood, 


Yarrow. 


"Defeription, 

IT  hath  many  long. Leaves  fpread  upon  the 
ground  and  fine  cutjand  devided  into  many 
final  parts,Its  Flowers  are  white  but  not  all  of 
a  whitenefs,  and  ftaied  in  Knots,  upondiverfe 
green  Stalks  which  rife  from  amongft  the 
Leaves . 

'Place. 

It  is  very  frequent  in  all  Pafturcs. 

Time. 

It  Flowerslate  even  in  the  latter  end  of 
gu(i. 

Vermes  and  vfe. 

An  Oyntmentof  them  cures  Wounds  and 
is  moft  fit  for  fuch  as  have  Inflamations,  it  tVoUnds, 
being  an  Herb  of  Dame  Venus  5  It  ftops  Inflama^ 
the  Terms  in  Women  being  boyled  in  white  t^ons. 
Wine  and  the  Decoiftion  drunk,  as  alfo  the  Terms 
Bloody  Flux  5  the  Oyntment  of  it  is  not  on-  f^ops, 
ly  good  for  green  Wounds,  but  alfo  for  Ulcers  Bloody 
and  Fiftulacs,  efpecialiy  fuch  as  abound  with  Plux, 
moifture  j  It  ftaies  the  fhedding  off  of  Hair,  BaldnJ, 
the  Head  being  bached  with  the  Decoiftion  of  Ulcers, 
it  j  inwardly  taken,  it  helps  the  retentive  fa-  Ft^ulaes, 
culty  of  the  Stomach,  it  helps  the  running  of  Retentive 
the  Reins  in  men,  and  the  whites  in  women.  Faculty, 
and  helps  fuch  as  cannot  hold  their  water  3  Running 
and  the  Leaves  chewed  in  the  Mouth  eafe  the  the 
Toothaehi  and  thefe  Vertpes  being  put  to-  Reins, 
gether  fiiew  the  Herb  to  be  drying  and  bin-  whites, 
ding.  .Achilles  is  fuppofed  to  be  the  firft  that  Diabetes^ 
left  the  Vertues  of  this  Herb  to  pofterity,  ha-  Toothacb. 
ving  learned  them  of  his  Mafter  Chyron  the  i 
Centaurc,and  certainly  a  very  profitable  Herb 
it  is  in  the  Camp,  and  perhaps  therfore  called 
CMilitaris, 


X  X  DIRECTIONS. 


24} 


The  EngUp^  T’hyjltwi, 


HAving  in  diyerfe  places  of  this  Treatife  promifedyou  the 
way  of  making  Syrups^  Qonferyes^  Oyls,  Gyntments, 
(Ore,  of  Herbs  ^  %oots,  Flowers  <t^c.  v^her^byygu  may 
have  them  ready  for  your  ufe  at  fuch  times  when  other  wife  they 
cannot  be  had  •  1  come  now  to  perform  what  I  promifed^ '  and 
you  pall  find  me  rather  better  than  worfe  than  my  mord. 

That  this  may  be  done  SFlethodically ^  I pall devide  my^DU 
reHions  mto  two  grand  SeBions^  and  each  SeBion  into  fever  at 
Chapters  j  and  then  youp  all  fee  it  look  with  fuch  a  .Counter 
nance  as  this  is. 


Seeft.  I. 

Of  gatherings  dryingsand 
J^efiing  Simfiles  and 
their  fuyees. 


Chap.  I .  Of  Leaves  of 
Herbs  <jrc. 

Chap.  2.  Of  Flowers. 

Chap.  3.  Of  Seeds. 

Chap.  4.  Of^ots. 

Chap.  5.  Of^Barks.  . 
Chap.  6.  Ofjuyces. 


Sc6t.  Z. 

Of  mating  and  /peeping 
fompounds. 


Chap.  i.  OfDipilled  Waters.^ 
Chap.  2.  Of  Syrups..  •  .  \ 
Chap.  3.  eff  Juleps, 
Ch2if.j{.OfT>ecoBions. 
Chap.  5.  Of  Oyls. 

Chap.  6.  Of  EleBuaries. 
Chap.  7.  OfConferVes., 
Chap.  8.  OffreferVes.^ 
'Chap.  p.  OfLohochs. 

Chap.  10.  Of Oyntments. 
Chap.  1 1 .  OfBlaiJlers. 
Chap.  1 2.  OfBukipes. 
Chap.  13.  Of  Troches. 

Chap.  14.  Of  Tills. 

Chap.  15.  The  -  way  of  fit^ 
ting  TMedicines  to  Com^ 
j  pound  Difeafes. 

Of’  all  thefc  in  order. 


X  X  2 


Sect. 


V 


244 


The  Englijh  ^hyfitim. 


Sect.  i. 

^he  wy  of  gatherings  dryings  and preferring 
Simples  and  their  fuyces. 


Chap.  I. 

Of  Leaves  of  Herbs  or  Trees, 

I*  Leavesj  chufe  only  fuch  as  are 

O  ^  Jwyce  j  pick 

them  carefully,  and  call  away 
fuch  as  are  any  way  declining, 
for  they  will  putrifie  the  reft,  fo  fhall  one 
handful  be  worth,  ten  of  thofe  you  buy  in 
Cheap' fide. 

a.  Nate  in  what  place  they  moft  delight. to 
grow  in,  and  gather  them  there,  for  Bettony 
that  grows  in  the  fliadow  is  far  better  than 
that  which  grows  in  the  Sun,  becaufe  it  de¬ 
lights  in  the  fhadow  j  fo  alfo  fuch  Herbs  as 
delight  to  grow  neer  the  W ater,  let  fuch  be  ga¬ 
thered  as  grow  neer  the  Water,  though  happi¬ 
ly  you  may  find  fome  of  them  upon  dry 
ground,  the  Treatife  will  inform  you  where 
every  Herb  delights  to  grow. 

3.  The  Leaves  of  fuch  Herbs  as  run  up  to 
Seed,  are  not  fo  good  when  they  are  in  flower 
as  before  (fome  few  excepted,  the  Leaves  of 
which  are  feldom  or  never  ufed)  in  fuch  cafes, 
if  through  ignorance  they  were  not  known,  or 
through  negligence  forgotten,  you  had  better 
take  the  top  and  the  Flower  than  the  Leaf. 

4.  Dry  them  well  in  the  Sun,  and  not  in 
the  fhadow  as  the  fwinge  of  Phyfitians  is,  for 
if  the  Sun  draw  away  the  Vertues  of  Herbs,  it 
muft  needs  do  the  like  by  Hay  by  the  fame 
Rule,  which  the  experience  of  every  Country 
Farmer  will  explode  for  a  notable  piece  of 
non-fenfe. 

y.  Such  as  are  Artifts  in  Aftrology  (and 
indeed  none  elfe  are  fit  to  make  Phyfitians) 
fuch  I  advife,  let  the  Planet  that  governs  the 
Herb  be  Angular,  and  the  ftronger  the  better, 
if  they  can  in  Herbs  of  Samrn,  ht  Saturn  be 
in  the  Afcendent,  in  the  Herbs  of  Mars,  let 
Mars  be  in  the  Mid-heavenjfor  in  thofe  Hou- 
fes  they  delight,  let  the  Moon  apply  to  them 
by  good  Afpedf,  and  let  her  not  be  in  the 
Houfes  of  their  Enemies  :  If  you  cannot  well 
ftay  till  fhe  apply  to  them,  let  her  apply  to  a 
Planet  of  the  fame  Triplicity,  if  you  cannot 


wait  that  time  neither,  let  her  be  with  a  fixed 
Star  of  their  Nature. 

6.  Having  well  dryed  them  put  them  up  in 
brown  Papers,  fewing  the  Paper  up  like  a 
Sack,  and  prefs  them  not  too  hard  together, 
and  keep  them  in  a  dry  place  neer  the  fire. 

7.  As  for  the  duration  of  dryed  Herbs,  a 
juft  time  cannot  be  given,  let  Authors  prate 
their  pleafures :  For, 

Firft,  Such  as  grow  upon  dry  grounds  will 
keep  better  than  fuch  as  grow  on  moift. 

Secondly,  Such  Herbs  as  are  full  of  juyee 
will  not  keep  fo  long  as  fuch  as  are  dryer. 

Thirdly,  Such  Herbs  as  are  well  dryed  will 
keep  longer  than  fuch  as  are  ill  dried. 

Yet  this  I  fay,  by  this  you  may  know  when 
they  arc  corrupted,  By  their  lofs  of  co¬ 
lour,  or  fmell,  or  both,  and  if  they  be  corrup¬ 
ted,  reafon  will  tell  you  that  they  muft  needs 
corrupt  the  Bodies  of  thofe  people  that  take 
them. 

8.  Gather  all  Leaves  in  the  hour  of  that 
Planet  that  governs  them. 

Chap.  2. 

Of  Flowers, 

1 .  "’"T^  He  Flower  which  is  the  beauty  of  the 
X  Plant,  and  of  none  of  the  Icaft  ufe 
in  Phyfick,  groweth  yeerly,  and  is  to  be  ga¬ 
thered  when  it  is  in  its  prime. 

2.  As  for  the  time  of  gathering  them,  Ict^ 
the  Planetary  hour,  and  the  Planet  that  rules 
the  Plant  they  come  of,  be  obferved,  as  we 
fhewed  you  in  the  foregoing  Chapter  5  as  for 
the  time  of  the  day  let  it  Ibe  when  the  Sun 
ftiines  upon  them  that  fo  they  may  be  dry,  for 
if  you  gather  cither  Herbs  or  Flowers  when 
they  are  wet  or  dewy,  they  will  not  keepj  and 
this  I  forgot  before. 

3.  Dry  them  well  in  the  Sun,  and  keep  them 
in  Papers  neer  the  fire,  as  I  ftiewed  you  in  the 
foregoing  Chapter. 

4.  So  long  as  they  retain  their  colour  and 
fmel  they  are  good,  either  ol  them  being  gone 
fo  is  the  Vertue  alfo. 


Chap. 


tan. 


Chap.  3.  ^ 

Of  Seeds, 

I.  '^TT^He  Seed  is  that  part  of  the  Plant 
X  which  is  endewed  with  a  vitall  facul¬ 
ty  to  bring  forth  its  likcj  and  it  contains  po¬ 
tentially  the  whol  Plant  in  it. 

2.  As  for  place  let  them  be  gathered  from 
the  plants  where  they  delight  to  grow. 

5.  Let  them  be  full  ripe  when  they  are  ga¬ 
thered,  and  forget  not  the  Coeleftial  Harmo¬ 
ny  before  mentioned,  for  I  have  found  by  ex¬ 
perience  that  their  Vertues  arc  twice  as  great 
at  inch  times  than  at  others  :  There  is  an  ap¬ 
pointed  time  for  every  thing  under  the  Sun. 

4.  When  you  have  gathered  them  dry  them 
a  little,  and  but  a  little  in  the  Sun  before  you 
lay  them  up. 

5.  You  deed  not  be  fo  careful  of  keeping 
them  fo  neer  the  fire  as  the  other  before  men¬ 
tioned,  becaufe  they  are  fuller  of  Spirit,  and 
therefore  not  fo  fubjed  to  cprrupt. 

6.  As  for  the  time  of  their  duration  ’tis  pal- 
able  they  will  keep  good  many  yeers,  yet  this 
fay,  they  are  bell  the  firft  yeer,  and  this  I 

make  appear  by -1  good  argument.  They  will 
grow  foonell  the  firft  yeer  they  be  fct,therefore 
then  are  they  in  their  prime,  and ’cis  an  eafie 
matter  to  renew  them  yecrly. 

Chap.  4. 

•  Of  ^ots, 

I.  P  Roots  chufe  fuch  as  are  neither  rot- 

V.-/  ten  nor  wormcaten,  but  proper  in 
their  taft,  colour,  and  fmell,  fuch  as  exceed 
neither  in  foftnefs  nor  hardnefs. 

2.  Give  me  leave  to  be  a  little  critical  a- 
gainftthc  Vulgar  received  Opinion,  which 
is.  That  the  Sap  falls  down  into  the  Root  in 
Autumn,  and  rifes  again  in  Spring,  as  men 
go  to  Bed  at  night  and  rife  in  the  morning  j 
and  this  idle'talc  of  untruth  is  fo  grounded  in 
the  Heads  not  only  of  the  V  ulgar  but  alfo  of 
the  Learned,  that  a  man  cannot  drive  it  out  by 
Reafon  :  I  pray  let  fuch  Sap-mongers  anfwer 
me  to  this  Argument,  If  the  Sap  fall  into  the 
Root  in  the  fall  of  the  Leaf,  and  lie  there  all 
the  Winter,  then  muft  the  Root  grow  only  in 
the  Winter,  as  experience  witnefl'eth,  but  the 
Root  grows  not  at  all  in  the  Winter,  as  the 
lame  experience  teacbeth  ,  but  only  in  the 
Summer.  Ergo, 

If  you  fet  an  Apple  Kernel  in  the  Spring, 
you  lliall  find  the  Root  to  grow  to  a  pretty 
bignefs  in  that  Summer,  and  be  not  a  whit 
bigger  next  Spring  ;  What  doth  the  Sap  do  in  j 


the  Root  all  that  while  ?  pick  ftraws  ?  For 
God’s  fake  build  not  your  faith  upon  Traditi¬ 
on,  ’tis  as  rotten  as'  a  rotten  Poft. 

The  truth  is, when  the  Smt  declines  from  the 
Tropick  of  Cancer,  the  Sap  begins  to  congeal 
both  in  Root  and  Branch,  when  he  toucheth 
the  Tropick  of  Capricorn  and  afeends  to. us 
ward,  it  begins  to  wax  thin  again,  and  by  de* 
grees  as  it  congealed  :  But  to  proceed. 

g.  The  dryer  time  you  gather  your  Roots  in 
the  better  they  are,  for  they  have  the  lefs  ex- 
crementitious  moifture  in  them. 

4*  Such  Roots  as  arc  foft,  your  bed  way  is 
to  dry  in  the  Sun,  or  elfe  hang  them  up  in  the 
Chimney  corner  upon  a  ftring  ;  as  for  fuch  as 
are  hard  you  may  dry  them  any  where. 

5-  Such  Roots  as  arc  great  will  keep  longer 
than  fuch  as  are  fmall,  yet  moft  of  them  will 
keep  a  yeer. 

6.  Such  Roots  as  arc  foft  it  is  your  beft  way 
to  keep  them  alwaies  neer  the  fire,  and  taWe 
this  general  Rule,  If  in  Winter  time  you  find 
any  of  your  Roots,  Hetbs  or  Flowers  begin  to 
grow  moift,  as  many  times  you  fhall,  efpecial- 
ly  in  the  Wintertime  (for ’tis  your  belt- way 
to  look  to  them  once  a  month)  dry  them  by  a 
very  gentle  fire,  or  if  you  can  with  conveni¬ 
ence  keep  them  neer  the  fire,  you  i^iay  fave 
your  felf  the  labor.  ... 

7*  It  is  in  vain  to  dry  inch  Roots  as  'may 
commonly  be  had,  as  Parlly,  Fennel,  Plan- 
tane  &c.  but  gather  them  only  lor  prefent 
need. 

Chap.  5. 

Of  ^arks, 

.m 

I*  T)A.rks  which  Phyfitians  ufe  in  Medif 

O  cines  are  thefe  forts,  of  Fruits,  o 
Roots,  of  Boughs.* 

2*  The  Barks  of  Fruits  is  to  be  taken  when 
the  Fruit  is  full  ripe,  as  Orrenge’s,  Lemmons. 
&c.  but  becaufe  I  have  nothing  to  do  with 
Exoticks  here,  I  fliall  pafs  them  without  any 
more  words. 

3 .  The  Barks  of  T rees  arc  beft  gathered  in 
the  Spring,  if  it  be  of  great  Trees,  as  Oaks  or 
the  like,  becaufe  then  they  come  eafieft  off,and 
fo  you  may  dry  them  if  you  pleafe,  but  indeed 
your  beft  way  is  to  gather  all  Barks  only  for 
prelent  ufe. 

4.  As  for  the  Bark  of  Roots,  ’tis  this,  and 
thus  to  be  gotten,  Take  the  Roots  of  fuch 
Herbs  as  have  a  pith  in  them,  ns  Parfly,  Fen¬ 
nel,  &c.  flit  them  in  the-  middle,  an.i  when 
you  have  taken  out  the  pith  (which  'you  may 
ealily  and  quickly  do)  -that  which  remains  is 
called  (though  fomthing  improperly)  the 
Bai  k  and  indeed  is  only  to  be  ufed. 

Y  y  Chap* 


'3:jf6 


The  Englijh  ^hyfi'tian. 


Chap. 

Of  Juyces. 

a.  TUyccs  are  to  be  preflTed  out  of  Herbs 
J  v  heatbey  arc  yong  and  tender,  and  al- 
fo  out  of  lome  Stalks,and  tender  tops  of  Herbs 
and  Plants,  aisd  dfo  out  of  foae  blowers. 

a.  Having  gathered  your  Herb  you  would 
preletvc  tbt  juyee  of,  when  it  is  very  dry  (for 
otberwife  your  Juyee  will  not  be  worth  a  But¬ 
ton)  tu'uife  it  very  well  in  a  flcnc  Mortar 
with  a  wooden  Pelfle,  then  having  put  it  into 
a  Canvas  Bag  (the  Herb  I  meanjnot  the  Mor¬ 
tar  for  that  will  yield  but  little  Juyee)  prefs  it 
hard  in  a  prefs,  then  take  the  Juyee  and  clari- 

fie  it.  .... 

?.  The  manner  of  clarifying  of  it  is  this, 
put  -t  into  a  Pipkin  or  Skillet,  or  fomc  luch 
thing  and  fet  it  over  the  fire,  and  when  the 
Scum  riferh,  take  it  off,  let  it  ftand  over  the 
fire  till  no  more  Scum  rife,  then  have  you  your 
Juyee  clarified,  call  away  the  Scum  as  a  thing 
of  no  ufe. 


4.  When  you  have  thus  clarified  ir,  you  have 
two  waies  to  preferve  it  all  the  yecr. 

Firft,  When  it  is  cold  put  it  into  a  Glafs, 
and  put  fo  much  Oyl  on  it  as  will  cover  it  the 
thicknefs  of  two  fingers,  the  Oyl  will  fwim  at 
top,  and  fo  keep  the  Air  from  coming  to  it  to 
putrifieit;  when  you  intend  to  ufe  it,  do  no 
more  but  fo,  powr  out  into  a  Porrenger,  a  lit¬ 
tle  more  than  you  intend  to  ufe,  and  if  any 
Oyl  come  out  with  it  fas  if  the  Glafs  be  not 
full  ’tis  a  bundled  to  one  if  there  do)  you  may 
cafily  feum  it  offwith  a  Spoon,  and  put  the 
Juyee  you  ufe  not,  into  the  Glafs  again  it  will 
quickly  fink  under  the  Oyl :  This  is  the  firft 
way. 

Secondly,  The  fecond  way  is  a  little  more 
difficult,  and  the  Juyee  of  Fruits  is  ufually 
preferved  this  way,  when  you  have  clarified 
the  Juyee  as  before,  boyl  it  over  the  fire,  till 
(being  cold)  it  be  of  the  thicknefs  of  Honey, 
this  is  moft  commonly  ufed  for  Dlfeafts  of  the 
mouth,  and  is  called  Tigb  and  Sapif. 

And  thus  much  for  the  firft  Sedipn,  the  St;- 
cond  follows. 


Sect*  x* 


n^ay  of  making  and  keeping  all 
cejjary  Compounds- 


Chap.  t.  ’ 
Of'DiJiilkd  Waters. 

4^4"  Medi- 

*5^  LJ  <§►  cines  which  conlift  in  their  own 
^  Nature,  which  Authors  vulgarly 
>44*  call  Simples,  though  iomihing  iin- 
properly,  for  indeed  and  in  truth,  nothing  is 
Simple  but  the  pure  Elements  j  adl  things  elfe 
are  compounded  of  them  .*  We  come  now  to 
treat  of  the  Artificial  Medicines,  in  the  front 
of  which  (becaufe  we  muft  begin  fomewhere) 
VV6  place  diftilled  Waters,  In  which  confi- 
der, 

1.  Waters  are  diftilled  out  of  Herbs,  Flow¬ 
ers,  Fruits,  and  Roots. 

z.  We  treat  not  here  of  ftrong  Waters  but 
of  cold,  as  being  to  aft  Galen's  Part  and  not 
'Paracelfiis., 

3.  The  Herbs  ought  to  be  diftilled  when 
they  arc  in  their  greateft  vigor,  and  fo  ought 


the  Flowers  alfo. 

4.  The  vulgar  way  of  Diftillation  which 
people  ufe,  becaufe  they  know  no.bctrerjis  in  a 
Peuter  Still,  and  although  Diftilled  Waters 
are  the  weakeft  of  all  Artificial  Medicines, and 
good  for  little  unlefi  for  mixtures  of  other 
Medicines,  yet  this  way  diftilled  they  are  wea¬ 
ker  by  many  degrees  than  they  would  be,  were 
they  diftilled  in  Sand :  If  I  thought  it  not 
impoffible  to  teach  you  the  way  of  diftilling 
in  Sand  by  writing,  I  would  attempt  it.  \ 
y.  When  you  have  diftilled  your  Water  put 
it  into  a  Glafs,  and  having  bound  the  top  of 
it  over  with  a  Paper  pricked  full  of  holes,  that 
fo  the  excrementitious  and  fiery  vapors  may 
exhale  (which  indeed  are  they  that  catife  that 
fetling  in  diftilled  Waters  called  the  Mother, 
which  corrupts  the  Waters  and  might  this  way 
be  prevented)  cover  it  clofe  and  keep  it  for 
your  ufe. 

6.  Stopping  diftilled  Waters  with  a  Cork 
makes  them  mufty,  and  fovvill  a  Paper  alfo  it 
it  do  but  touch  the  Water,  your  beft  way  then 

is 


is  to  flop  them  with  a  Biacidei->  being  firft  wet 
in  Water ,  and  bound  over  the  top  of  the 
Glafs. 

Such  cold  Waters  as  art?  diftillcd  in  a  Peuter 
Still  (if  well  kept)  will  endure  a  yecr,  fuch  as 
arc  diftillcd  in  Sand,  as  they  are  twice  as 
ftrongj  fo  will  they  endure  twice  as  long. 

Chap.  2. 

Of  Syrups. 

I.  A  Syrup  is  a  Medicine  of  a  Liquid 
form,  compofedof  Infufion,  Dcco- 
ftion  and  juyee  J  and  i.  for  the  more  grateful 
taft,  2-  for  the  better  keeping  of  it,  with  a 
certain  quantity  of  Honey  or  Sugari  hereafter 
mentioned  boiled  to  the  thicknefs  of  new  Ho- 


ncy. 

2.  You  fee  at  the  firft  view  then  that  this 
Aphorifm  devides  it  felf  into  three  Branches, 
which  deferve  fevcrally  to  be  treated  of,  vi\. 

1.  S pups 'Made  by  inf  njfon. 

2.  Syrups  made  by  Deco£tion> 

3.  Syrups  made  by  Juyee. 

Of  each  of  ihefe  (for  your  Inftruftion  fake 
kind  Country  men  and  women)  I  fpeak  a 
word,  or  two  or  three  apart. 

Firft,  Syrups  made  by  Infufion  are  ufually 
made  of  Flowers.,  and  of  fuch  Flowers, 
as  loon  lofe  both  colour  and  ftrength 
by  boyling,  as  Rofes,  Violets,  Peach- 
Flowers  &c.  my  Tranflation  of  the 
London  Difpenjalo'ry  will  inftruft  you  in 
the  reft :  They  are  thus  made,  having 
picked  your  Flowers  clean,  to  every 
pound  of  them  ad  three  pound  (or  three 
pints,  which  you  will  for  it  is  all  one) 
of  Spring  Water  made  boyling  hot  by 
the  hre,  firft  put  your  Flowers  in  a  Peu¬ 
ter  Pot  with  a  cover,  then  powr  the  Wa¬ 
ter  to  them,  then  (hutting  the  Pot,  let  it 
ftand  by  the  fire  to  keep  hoc  twelve 
hours,  then  ftrain  it  out  (in  fuch  Syrups 
as  purge,  as  Damask  Rofes,  Peach-Flo¬ 
wers,  &c.  the  ufual  and  indeed  the  beft 
way  is  to  repeat  this  Infufion,  adding 
frefli  Flowers  to  the  fame  Liquor  diverfe 
times  that  fo  it  may  be  the  ftronger)  ha¬ 
ting  ftrained  it  out,  put  the  Infufion  in¬ 
to  a  Peuter  Bafon,  or  an  Earthen  one 
wellglaffed,  and  to  every  pint  of  it,  ad 
two  pound  of  fine  Sugar,  which  being 
only  melted  over  the  fire  without  boy- 
ling,  and  feummed,  will  produce  you  the 
Syrup  you  dcfirc. 

Secondly,  Syrups  made  by  Decoftion  arc 
ufually  uied  of  Compounds,  yet  may  a- 
ny  Simple  Herb  be  thus  converted  into 
Syrup  j  Take  the  Herb,  Root,  or  Flow¬ 
er  you  would  make  into  Syrup  and  bruife 
it  a  little,  thenboyl  it  in  a  convenient 


quantity  of  Spring  Water ,  the  more  wa¬ 
ter  you  boyl  it  in  the  weaker  will  it  be,  a 
handful  of  the  Herb, Root, &c.  is  a  con¬ 
venient  quantity  for  a  pint  of  Water} 
boyl  it  till  half  the  water  be  confumed, 
then  let  it  ftand  till  it  be  almoft  cold,and 
ftrain  it  (being  almoft  cold)  through  a 
woollen  cloth, letting  it  ntn  out  at  leifure 
Without  prefling,  to  every  pint  of  this 
DecOiftiou  ad  one  pound  of  Sugar  and 
boyl  it  over  the  fire  till  it  come  CO  a  Sy¬ 
rup,  which  you  may  know  if  you  now 
and  then  cool  a  little  of  it  in  a  fpoon, 
feum  it  all  the  while  it  boyls,  and  when 
it  is  fufficicntly  boyled,  whilft  it  is  hot 
ftrain  it  again  through  a  woollen  clorh, 
but  prefs  it  not  j  thus  have  you  the  Syrup 
petfeded. 

Thirdly,  Syrups  made  of  juyees  are  ufually 
made  of  fuch  Herbs  as  are  full  of  Juyee, 
and  indeed  they  are  better  made  into  a 
Syrup  this  way  than  any  other  }  the 
peration  is  thus ,  having  beaten  the 
Herb  in  a  ftone  Mortar  with  a  wooden 
Pcftlc,  prtfs  out  the  Juyee  and  clarifie  ic 
as  you  were  taught  before  in  the  Juyees, 
then  let  the  Juyee  boyl  away  till  a  quar¬ 
ter  of  it  (or  ncer  upon)  be  confumed,  to 
a  pint  of  this  ad  a  pound  of  Sugar,  and 
boyl  it  to  a  Syrup,  alwaies  feumming  it, 
and  when  it  is  boyled  enough,  ftrain  it 
through  a  woollen  cloth  as  wc  taught 
you  before,  and  keep  it  for  your  ufc. 

?.  If  you  make  Syrups  of  Roots  that  arc  a- 
ny  thing  hard,  as  Parfley,  Fennel,  and  grafs 
Roots  &c.  when  you  have  bruifedthem,  lay 
them  iiifteep  fometime  in  that  Water  which 
you  intend  to  boyl  them  in,  hot,  fo  will  the 
Vertue  the  better  come  out. 

4*  Keep  your  Syrups  cither  in  Glaflcs  nr 
ftone  Pots,  and  flop  them  not, with  Cork* 
nor  Bladder,  unlefs  you  would  have  the  Glafj 
break  and  the  Syrup  loft, }  and  as  many  Opi¬ 
nions  as  there  are  in  this  N  ation,  I  fuppofe 
there  are  but  few  or  none  of  this,  only  bind  a 
Paper  about  the  Mouth. 

5*  All  Syrups  if  well  made  will  continue  a 
yeer,  with  fome  advantage  yet  of  all,  fuch  as 
are  made  by  Infufion  keep  the  leaft  while. 

Chap.  3. 

Of  Juleps. 

I.  TUlcps  were  firft  invented  as  I  fuppofe  in 

J  .Ambia,  andmyreafon  is  becaufc  the 
word  Juleb  is  an  Arabick  word. 

2.  It  fignifies  only  a  plcafant  Potion,  and 
was  vulgarly  ufed  (by  fuch  as  were  fick  and 
wanted  help,  or  fuch  as  were  in  health,  and 
wanted  no  money)  to  quench  thirft. 

3.  Now  a  daies’tis  commonly  ufed, 

Y  y  a  I.  re 


24S 


Xhe  Englijl?  Thyjitian, 


■  1 .  7V  prepare  the  S  odffor  P argation- 
To  open  Ob(hu6ii6m  and  the  Pores. 

3.  Todigeft  tough. Htmors. 

4.  To  qaaltfie  hot  diftempers  &c. 

4.  It  is  thus  made  (1  meati  Simple  Juleps 
for  I  have  nothing  to  fay  to  Compounds  herej 
all  Compounds  have  as  many  fevcral  Idea  s  as 
men  have  crotchets  in  their  Brain)  I  fay 
Simple  Juleps  are  thus  made  :  Take  a^fint  of 
fuch  diftillcd  Water  as  conducech  to  the  cure 
of  your  diftempetj  which  this  Treatife  will 
plentifully  furnifli  you  withalj  to  which  add 
two  ounces  of  Syrup  conducing  to  the  fame  ef- 
fedt  (I  fhall  si^'e  youRules  for  it  in  the  laft 
Chapter)  mix  them  together  and  drink  a 
draught  of  it  at  your  plealure  >  If  you  love 
tart  things  ad  ten  drops  of  Oyl  of  Vitriol  to 
your  pint  and  fhake  it  together,  and  it  will 
have  a  fine  grateful  taft. 

y.  All  Juleps  arc  made  for  prefent  ufe,  and 
therefore  it  is  in  vain  to  fpeak  of  their  durati¬ 
on. 

Chap.  4. 

Of  DecoBions. 

1,  A  LL  the  difference  between  Decofti- 

oK  ons  and  Syrups  made  by  Decoftion 

is  this.  Syrups  arc  made  to  keep,  Decodtions 
only  for  prefent  ufe,  for  you  can  hardly  keep 
a  Decodtion  a  week  at  any  time,  if  the  wea¬ 
ther  be  hot,  not  half  fo  long. 

1.  Decodtions  are  made  of  Leaves,  Roots, 
flowers,  Seedst  fruits,  or  Barks,  conducing 
to  the  cure  of  the  Difeafe  you  make  them  for  j 
in  the  fame  manner  are  they  made  as  we  fliew- 
ed  yeu  in  Syrups. 

3.  Decodtions  made  with  Wine  laft  longer 
than  fuch  as  are  made  with  W ater,  and  if  you 
take  yofiV  Dccodtion  to  clenfe  the  paflages  of 
Urincj'or  open  Obftruaions,  jour  belt  way 
is  to  make  it  with  white  Wine  inftead  ofWa-; 
ter,  becaufe  that  is  moft  penetrating. 

4.  Decoftions  are  of  moft  ufe  in  fuch  Dlf- 
eafes  as  lie  in  the  Paflages  of  the  Body,  as  the 
Stomach  5 Bowels,  Kidneys, Paflages  of  Urine, 
and  Bladder,  bccaufc  Decodtions  pafs  quicker 
to  thofe  places  than  any  other  form  of  Medi¬ 
cines. 

y.  If  you  will  fweeten  your.Dccodfion  with 
Sugar,  or  any  Syrup  fit  for  the  occafion  you 
take  it  for  which  is  better,  you  may  and  no 
harm  done. 

6.  If  in  a  Decoftion  you  boyl  both  Roots, 
Herbs,  Flowers,  and  Seeds  together,  let-the 
Roets  boyl  a  good  while  firft,  becaufe  they  re¬ 
tain  their  Vercue  Isngeft,  then  the  next  in  or¬ 
der  by  the  fame  Rulej  -vi^.  i.  The  Barks, 

2.  the  Herbs,  3.  the  Seeds,  4.  the  Flowcrsj 

5 .  the  Spices  if  you  put  any  in,  becaufe  their 
vertue  comes  fooneit  out. 

7.  Such  things  as  by  boyling  caufe  fluninefs 


to  a  Decoftion,  as  Figs,  Quince  Seeds,  Lin- 
feed  &c.  your  beft  way  is,  after  you  have  brui- 
fed  them,  to  tie  them  up  in  a  linnen  rag, as  you 
tie  up  a  Calves  Brains,  and  fo  boyl  them. 

8.  Keep  all  Decodtions  in  a  Glafs  clofc 
flopped,  and  in  the  .cooler  place  you  keep 
them,  the  longer  will  they  laft  ere  they  be 
fowr. 

Laftly,  The  ufual  Dofe  to  be  given  at  one 
time,  is  ufually  two,  three,  four,  or  five  oun¬ 
ces,  according  to  the  age  and  ftrength  of  the 
Patient,  the  feafdn  of  the  yeer,  the  ftrength 
of  the  Medicine,  and  the  quality  of  the  Dif¬ 
eafe. 

Chap.  5. 

Of  Ojles. 

1.  /^Y  L  Olive,  which  is  commonly 
I  known  by  the  name  of  Sailer  Oyl,  I 

fuppofe  becaufe  it  is  ufually  eaten  with  Sailers 
by  them  that  love  it  3  If  it  be  prefled  out  of 
ripe  Olives,  according  to  Galen  is  temperate, 
and  exceeds  in  no  one  quality. 

2.  Of  Oyls,  fome  are  Simple,  and  fome  are 
Compound. 

3.  Simple  Oyls  are,  fuch  as  arc  made  of 
Fruits  or  Seeds,  by  expreflion,as  Qyl  of  fw'set 
and  bitter  Almonds,  Linfecd,  and  Rapefeed 
Oyl.&c.  of  which  fee  my  IDiipen  fatory. 

4. CompoimdOyls  are  made  ofOyl  o*Olivcs 
and  other  Simples,  imagine  Herbs,  Flowers, 
Roots,  &c. 

5.  The  way  of  making  them  is  this, Having 
bruifed  the  Herbs  or  Flowers  you  would  make 
your  Oyl  of,  put  them  in  an  Earthen  pot,  and 
to  two  or  three  handfuls  of  them,  powr  a  pint 
of  Oyl,  cover  the  pot  with  a  paper,  and  fet  it 
in  the  Sun,  about  a  Fortnight  or  lefs  accor¬ 
ding  as  the  Sun  is  in  hotnefs  5  then  having 
warmed  it  very  well  by  the  fire,  prefs  out  the 
Herbs  &c.  very  hard  in  a  prefs,  and  ad  as  ma¬ 
ny  more  Herbs  t©  the  fame  Oyl,  bruifed  (the 
Herbs  I  mean  not  the  Oyl)  in  like  manner,fet 
them  in  the  Sun  as  before,  the  oftner  you  re¬ 
peat  this  the  ftronger  will  your  Oyl  be  j  at 
laft  when  yeu  conceive  it  ftrong  enough,  boyl 
both  Herbs  and  Oyl  together  till  the  juyee  be 
Gonfumed  which  you  may  know  by  its  leaving 
its  bubling,  and  the  Herbs  will  be  crifp,  then 
ftrain  it,  whilft  it  is  hotjand  keep  it  in  a  ftone 
or  Glafs  Veflel  for  your  ufe. 

6.  As  for  Chymical  Oyls,  I  have  nothing 
to  fay  in  this  Treatile. 

7.  The  General  ufe  of  thefe  Oyls  is  for  pain 
in  the  Limbs,  rbughnefs  of  the  Skin,  the  Itch 
&c.  as  alfo  for  Oyntments  and  Plaifters. 

8.  If  you  have  occafion  to  ufe  it  for  Wounds 
or  Ulcers,  in  two  ounces  of  Oyl,  difloHe  half 
an  ounce  of  Turpentine)  the  heat  of  the  fire 
will  quickly  do  it,  for  Oyl  it  felf  is  oflen^five 
to  Wojiinds,and  the  Turpentine  qualifies  it. 

Chap. 


24? 


The  EngliJI?  ThjiJitian. 


Chap.  6. 

OfEleHuaries. 

PHyGtians  make  more  a  quoil  than  needs 
behalf  about  Elcduarics*  I  fhall  pre- 
fciibe  but  one  general  way  of  making  them  up, 
as  for  the  Ingredients  you  may  vary  them  as 
you  pleafe,  and  according  as  you  find  occafi- 
on  by  the  laft  Chapter. 

I.  That  you  may  make  Eleduaries  when 
you  need  them^  it  is  requifite  that  you  keep 
alwaies  HerbSj  RootSj  Seeds,  Flowers  &c. 
ready  dried  in  your  Houfe,  that  fo  you  may, 
be  in  readinefs  to  beat  them  into  ponder  when 
you  need  them. 

2.  Your  better  way  is  to  keep  them  whol 
than  beaten,  fbr  being  beaten  they  are  the 
more  (libjcd  to  lofe  their  ftrength,  becaufe 
the  Air  foon  penetrates  them. 

3.  If  they  be  not  dry  enough  to  beat  into 
pouder  when  you  need  them,  dry  them  by  a 
gentle  fire  till  they  are  fo. 

4.  Having  beaten  them,  fift  them  through  a 
fine  TifFanv  Scarce,  that  fo  there  may  be  no 
great  pieces  found  in  your  Electuary. 

y.  To  on  ounce  of  your  Pouder,  ad  three 
ounces  of  clarified  Honey ,  this  quantity  I 
hold  to  be  fuflficient  3  I  confefs  Authors  dif¬ 
fer  about  it :  If  you  would  make  more  orjefs 
Elcftuary,  vary  your  propOrfions  accordingly. 

6.  Mix  them  well  together  in  a  Mortar, 
and  take  this  for  a  truth,  you  cannot  mix  them 
too  much. 

7.  Theway  toclarifieHoncy  istofetit  o- 
ver  the  fire  in  a  convenient  velTel  till  the  feum 
arife,  and  when  the  feum  is  taken  off  it  is  cla¬ 
rified. 

8.  The  ufual  Dofe  of  Cordial  Eleftuarics 
is  from  half  a  dram  to  two  drams,  of  purging 
Electuaries  from  half  an  ounce  to  an  ounce. 

9.  The  manner  of  keeping  them  is  in  a 
pot. 

10.  The  time  of  taking  them,  is  either  in 
the  morning  falling,  and  falling  an  hour  after 
them,  or  at  night  going  to  bed  three  or  four 
hours  after  fupper. 

Chap.  7. 

Of  Conferees, 

l-  "  I  ^  He  way  of  making  Conferves  h  two- 
X  fold,  one  of  flcrbs  and  Flowers, and 
,  the  other  of  Fruits. 

Conferves  of  Herbs  and  Flowers  are 
thus  made.  If  you  make  your  Conferves  of 
Herbs,  as  of  Scurvy-grafs,  Wormwood,  Rue, 
or  the  like,  take  only  the  Leaves  and  render 
tops  ffor  you  may  beat  your  heart  out  before 


you  can  beat  the  Stalks  final!)  and  having  bea¬ 
ten  them,  waigh  them,  and  to  everie  pound 
of  them  ad  three  po'md  of  Sug,ar,  beat  them 
verie  well  together  in  a  Mortar,  you  cannot 
beat  them  too  much. 

3.  Conferves  of  Fruits,  as  of  Barberries, 
Sloes,  and  the  like  is  thus  made  3  Firll  fcald 
the  Fruit,  then  rub  the  pulp  through  a  thick 
hair  Sieve  made  for  the  purpofe,  culled  a  pul¬ 
ping  Sieve,  you  may  do  it  for  a  need  with  the 
back  of  a  Spoon,  then  take  chis'Pulp  thus 
drawn,  and  ad  to  it  its  waight  of  Sugar  and 
no  more,  put  it  in  a  Peuter  Veflel,  and  over 
a  Charcoal  fire  llir  it  up  and  down  till  the 
Sugar  be  melted,  and  your  Conferve  is  made. 

4.  Thus  have  you  the  way  of  making  Con¬ 
ferves,  theway  of  keeping  of  them  is  in  Ear¬ 
then  pots. 

5 .  The  Dofe  is  ufiially  the  quantity  of  a 
Nutmeg  at  a  time  morning  and  evening,  or 
(unlefs  they  be  purging)  when  you  pleafe. 

6.  Of  Conferves,  fome  keep  many  yeers,  as 
Conferves  of  R-ofe-s ,  others  but  a  yeer,  as 
Conferves  of  Borrage,  Buglofs,  Cowllips  and 
the  like. 

7.  Have  a  care  of  the  working  of  fome 
Conferves  prefcntly  after  they  are  made,  look 
to  them  once  a  day  and  lliu  them  aboutj  Con¬ 
ferves  of  Borrage,  Buglofs,  and  Wormwood 
have  gotten  an  excellent  faculty  at  that  fport. 

8 .  You  may  know  when  your  Conferves  are 
almoil  fpoiled  by  this,  you  fliall  find  a  hard 
cruft  at  top  with  little  holes  in  it  as  though 
Worms  had  been  eating  there. 

Chap.  8. 

Of  Treferyes. 

OF  Preferves  are  fundiy  forts,  and  the 
Operations  of  all  being  fomthing  dif¬ 
ferent  we  will  handle  them  all  apart. 

There  are  preferved  with  Sugar, 

I  Flewers- 
2  Fruits. 

3  Roots- 
4  Bxi\s. 

I.  Flowers  are  but  very  feldom  preferved,  I 
never  faw  any  that  I  remember  fave  only 
Cowflip  Flowers,  and  that  was  a  great  fafhi- 
onin5«j/jfca;  when  I  was  a  boyj  It  is  thus 
done,  firft,  take  a  flat  Glafs,  we  call  them  jarr 
Glafles,  ftrew  in  a  lain  of  fine  Sugar,  on  that 
a  lain  of  Flowers,  on  that  anotherdain  of  Su¬ 
gar,  on  that  another  lain  of  Flowers,  do  fo  til 
yeurGlafs  be  full,then  tie  it  over  with  a  paper, 
and  in  a  little  time  you  fhall  have  very  excel¬ 
lent  and  pieafant  Preferves. 

There  is  another  way  of  Prefer ving  Flow¬ 
ers,  namely  with  Vinegar  and  Salt,  as  they 
pickle  Capers  and  Broom  Buds,  but  becaufe  I 
have  little  skill  in  it  my  felf  I  canot  teach  you. 

Z  2  2  Fruits 


205 


\ 


The  EngUJh  ^hyjttian. 


z .  FruitSj  as  Quirices  and  the  like  are  pre- 
ferved  two  waieSj  . 

Firft,  Boyl  them  well  inWateij  and  then 
ulp  them  trough  a  Sieve  as  we  (hewed  you 
cfore,  then  with  the  like  quantity  of  Sugar 
boyl  the  Water  they  were  boylcd  in  to  a  Sy¬ 
rup,  Vi\.  a  pound  of  Sugar  to  a  pint  of  Li¬ 
quor,  to  every  pound  of  this  Syrup  ad  four 
ounces  of  the  Pulp,  then  boyl  it  with  a  very 
gentle  fire  to  the  right  confilteace,  which  you 
may  eafily  know  if  you  drop  a  drop  of  it  upon 
a  Trencher,  if  it  be  enough  it  will  not  hick 
to  your  fingers  when  it  is  cold. 

Secondly,  Another  way  to  preferve  Fruits 
is  this,  Firft  pare  off  the  rind,  then  cut  them 
in  halves  and  take  out  the  Core,  then  boyl 
themin  Water  till  they  arc  foft.  If  you  know 
when  Beef  is  boyled  enough  you  may  eafily 
know  when  they  are  5  then  boyl  the  Water 
with  its  like  waight  of  Sugar  into  a  Syrup,  put 
the  Syrup  into  a  Pot,  and  put  the  boyled  Fruit 
as  whol  as  you  left  it  when  you  cut  it  into  it, 
and  let  it  fo  remain  till  you  have  occafion  to 
ufe  it. 

$.  Roots  are  thus  preferved,  Firft,  ferape 
them  very  clean,  and  clenfe  them  from  the 
Pith  if  they  hare  any,  for  fome  Roots  have 
not,  as  Eringo  and  the  like,  boyl  them  in 
w  ater  till  they  be  foft  as  we  (hew  you  before  in 
the  Fruits,  then  boyl  the  Water  you  boyled  th^ 
Roots  into  a  Syrup  as  we  (hewed  you  before, 
then  keep  the  Roots  whol  in  the  Syrup  till 
you  ufe  them. 

4.  As  for  Barks  we  have  but  few  come  to 
out  hands \o  be  done,  and  thofeof  thofefew 
that  I  can  remember,  are  Orrenges,  Lem¬ 
mons,  Citrons,  and  the  outer  Bark  of  Walnuts 
which  grows  without  the  Shell,  for  the  Shels 
themfelvcs  would  make  but  feurvy  Preferves, 
there  be  they  I  can  remember,  if  there  be  any 
more  put  them  into  the  number. 

The  way  of  Preferving  thefe  is  not  all  one 
in  Authors,  for  fome  are  bitter,  fome  arc  not, 
fuch  as  arc  bitter,  fay  Authors,  muft  be  foaked 
in  warm  Water,  often  times  changed  till  their 
bitter  taft  be  fled,  but  I  like  not  this  way,  and 
myreafonis,  beeaufe  I  doubt  when  their  bit- 
ternefs  is  gone,  fo  is  their  V ertue  alfo }  I  (hall 
then  preferibe  one  common  way,  namely  the 
fame  with  the  (ormer,  Firft  boyl  them 

whol  till  they  be  foft,  then  make  a  Syrup  with 
Sagar  and  the  Liquor  you  boylcd  them  in,and 
keep  the  Barks  in  the  Syrup. 

5.  They  arc  kept  in  Glafl'cs  or  glalTed 
Pots. 

6.  The  preferved  Flowers  will  keep  a  yeer  if 
you  can  forbear  eating  of  them,  the  Roots  and 
Barketnuch  longer. 

7.  This  Art  was  plainly  and  clearly  at  firft 
invented  for  ddicacy,  yet  came  afterwards  to 
be  of  excellent  ufe  in  Pfeyfick  j  For, 

Firft,  Hereby  Medicines  are  made  pleafawt 
for  fick  and  queaty  Stomachs,  which  «lfe 
would  loath  them. 


2.  Hereby  they  are  preferved  from  decaying 

a  long  time. 

Chap.  p. 

Of  Lohochs, 

*  '  I  'Hat  which  the  Arabians  call  Lohoch, 

JL  and  the  Greeks  Eciegma,  the  Latins 
cAlLtnBus^  and  in  plain  Englifh,  fignifies 
nothing  elfc  but  a  thing  to  be  licked  up. 

2  Their  firft  invention  was  to  prevent  and 
remedy  afflidions  of  the  Bread  and  Lungs,  to 
elenfe  the  Lungs  of  Flegm,  and  make  it  fit  to 
be  caft  out. 

3  They  are  in  Body  thicker  than  a  Syrup, 
and  not  fo  thick  as  an  Elcftuary. 

4.  The  manner  of  taking  them  is  often  to 
take  a  little  with  a  Liquoris  ftick,  and  let  k 
go  down  at  leifure.  , 

5  They  arc  eafily  thus  made,  make  "a  Dc- 
coflionofany  pcdcral  Herbs,  the  Treatife 
will  furnilh  you  witfi  enough,  and  when  you 
have  drained  it,  with  twife  its  waight  of  Ho¬ 
ney  or  Sugar,  boyl  it  to  a  Lohoch  j  If  you  are 
molefted  with  tough  Flegm,  Honey  is  better 
than  Sugar,  and  if  you  ad  a  little  Vincgcr  to 
it  you  will  do  well,  if  not,  I  hold  Sugar  to  be 
better  than  Honey. 

6  It  is  kept  in  Pots  and  will  a  yeer  and  lon- 
ger. 

7  Its  ufe  is  excellent  for  roughnefs  of  the 
Windpipe,  Inflamatiotis  of  the  Lungs,  Ulcers 
in  the  Lungs,  diffieultie  of  Breath,  Afthmacs,' 
Coughs  and  diftillation  of  Humors.  ^ 

♦ 

Chap.  10. 

Of  Oyntments.  •  * 

I  X  r  Arious  are  the  waics  of  making  Oynt- 

V  ments  which  Authors  have  leit  to  po- 
ftcritie ,  which  I  (hall  omit  and  quote  one 
which  is  eafieft  to  be  made,  and  therefore 
tnoft  beneficial  to  people  that  are  ignorant  in 
Phyfick,  for  whofe  fakes  I  write  thisj  It  is 
thus  done, 

BruifethofeHerbs,  Flowers,  ©r  Roots  you 
would  make  an  Oyntroent  of,  and  to  two 
handfuls  of  your  bruifed  Herbs  ad  a  pound  of 
Hogs  Greafe  tryed,  or  clenfed  from  the  skins, 
beat  them  very  well  together  in  a  done  Mor¬ 
tar  with  a  wooden  Peftle,  then  put  it  in  s 
done  Pot  (the  Herbs  and  Greafe  I  mean,  not 
the  Mortar)  cover  it  with  a  paper,  and  fee  it 
either  in  the  Sun  or  .fome  other  warm  place  ‘ 
three,  four,  or  fivs  dales,  that  it  may  mclt,then 
take  it  out  and  boyl  it  a  little,  then  whillf  it  is 
hot,  ftrain  it  out,  prelfing  it  out  very  hard  in 
a  Prefs,  to  this  Gieafc  ad  as  many  more  Herbs 
bruifed  as  before,  let  them  (land  is  like  man¬ 
ner 


Tie  En^UJh  ^hyJitUn. 


ncraslong,  then  boyl  them  as  you  did  the 
former,  it  you  think  your  Oyntmenc  be  not 
ftrong  enough  you  may  do  it  the  third  and 
fourth  time  j  yet  this  I  tcU  you,  the  fuller  of 
Juyce  your  Herbs  are,  the  fooner  will  your 
Oyntmcnt  be  ftrong,  the  laft  time  you  boyl 
it,  boyl  it  fo  long  till  your  Herbs  be  crifp  and 
the  Juyce  confumed,  then  ftrain  it,  preffing 
it  hard  in  a  Prefs ,  and  to  every  pound  of 
Oyntment,  ad  two  ounces  of  Tur^ntine,and 
as  much  Wax,  becaufe  Greafeis  offenfivc  to 
Wounds  as  well  as  Oyl, 

2  Oyntments  are  vulgarly  known  to  be 
kept  in  Potsj  and  will  laft  above  a  ycer, above 
two  yeer. 

Chap.  1 1. 

Of  Tlaijlen. 

I  '  i  ’^Hq  Greeks  rriadc  their  Plaifters  of  di- 
][_  verfe  Simples  and  put  Mettals  in  moft 
of  them  if  not  in  all,  for  havinglreduced  their 
Mettals  into  Pouder  they  mixed  them  with 
that  fatty  fubftance,  whereof  the  reft  of  the 
PLiifter  confifted.  whilft  it  was  yet  hot,  con¬ 
tinually  ftirring  it  up  and  down  left  it  fhould 
fink  to  the  bottom,  fo  they  continually  ftirred 
it  till  it  was  ftiff,  then  they  made  it  up  in 
rolls,  which  when  they  need  for  ufe  they  could 
melt  by  the  fire  again. 

2.  The  Arabians  made  up  theirs  with 
Meals,  Oyl,  and  Fat,  which  needed  not  fo 
long  boyling. 

3  The  Greeks  Emplaftcrs  confifted  of  thefe 
Ingredients,  Mettals,  Stones,  diverfe  forts  of 
Earths,  Feces, juyees,  Liquoris,  Seeds,  Roots, 
Hcrbs,Excrements  of  Creatures, W ax, Rozin, 
Gums. 

Chap.  12. 

Of  Tultiffes, 

I  T^Ultiftes  are  thofe  kind  of  things'  which 

JL  the  Latins  call  and  our 

learned  Fellows  that  if  they  can  read  Englifli 
thats  all,  call  them  Cataplafms,  bccaufe  ’tis  a 
crabbed  word  few  underftand  J  it  is  indeed  a 
very  fine  kind  of  Medicine  to  ripen  Sores, 

2  They  are  made  of  Herbs  and  Roots  fitted 
to  the  Difeafe  and  Member  afflifted,  being 
chopped  final  and  boyled  in  Water  almoft  to  a 
Jelly,  then  by  adding  a  little  Barley  Meal  or 
Meal  of  Lupines,  and  a  little.  Oyl  ot  rough 
Sheep  Suet,  which  I  bold  to  be  better,  fpread 
upon  a  cloath  and  applied  to  the  grieved 
place. 

j  Their  ufe  is  to  cafe  pains,  to  break  Sores, 
to  cool  laflamations,  to  diifolvc  hardnefs,  to 
cafe  the  Spleen,  to  concoft  Humors,  to  difti- 
pate  Swellings. 

4  I  btfcich  take  this  Caution  along 


with  you,  Ufe  rto'Poltifles  (if  you  can  help 
itj  that  arc  of  a  heating  Nature,  before  you 
have  fir  ft  clenfed  thc^Body,  becaufe  they  are 
fubjc(ft  to  draw  the  Humors  to  them  from  eve¬ 
ry  part  of  the  Body. 

.  Chap,  , 

Of  TrocJ?es, 

1  ''  I  ^Hc  Latins  call  them  TlacentuU,  or 
X  little  Cakes  (and  you  might  have 
feen  what  the  Greeks .  call  them  too,  had  not 
the  laft  Edition  of  my  Lmdon  Difpcnfato’iy^ 
been  fo  helliihly  printed,  that’s  all  the  Com¬ 
monwealth  gets  by  one  Stationer’s  printing  a- 
nothers  Coppies,  To  plague  the  Coun¬ 
try  with  falfe  Prints,  and  dilgrace  the  Au¬ 
thor)  the  Greeks  Tfa;)^i'oTo/,  Kt/jtA/cr*o/, 

I  and  dpria-jcoi  they  are  ufually  little  round 
flat  Cakes,  or  you  may  make  them  fquate  if 
you  will. 

2  Their  firft  invention  was,  that  Ponders 
being  fo  kept  might  refill:  the  intromiffion  of 
Air  and  fo  endure  pure  the  longer. 

3  Befides,  they  are  the  eafier  carried  in  the 
Pockets  of  fuch  as  travel ;  many  a  man  (for 
example)  is  forced  to  travel  whofc  Stomach  is 
too  cold,  or  atleaft  not  fo  hot  as  ic  ihould  be, 
which  is  moft  proper,  for  the  Stomach  is  ne¬ 
ver  cold  till  a  man  be  dead  j  in  fuch  a  cafe  ’tis 
better  to  carry  Troches  of  Wonnwood  or  of 
Galanga,  in  a  Paper  in  his  Pocket  and  more 
convenient  behalf  than  to  lug  a  Gally-pot  a- 
long  with  him. 

4  They  are  thus  made,  At  night  when  you 
go  to  bed,  take  two  drams  of  fine  G'am  Tra- 
gacanth,  put  it  into  a  Gally*pot,  and  p«i:  fialf 
a  quarter  of  a  pint  of  any  dtftilled  W^eir  fi^ 
ting  the  purpofc  you  would  nvtke  yo.ur  Ti'O- 
ches  for,  to  it,  cover  it,  and  the  next  mor¬ 
ning  you  lhall  find  it  in  fuch  a  Jelly  as  Phyfi- 
tians  call  Muflilage,  with  this  you  may  (with 
a  little  pains  taking)  make  any  Pouder  into 
Part,  and  that  Paft  into  little  Cakes  called 
Troches.  * 

5.  Having  made  them,  dry  them  well  in  rhe 
fhadow  and  keep  them  in  a  Pot  for  your  ufe. 

Chap.  14. 

Of  fills. 

r 

I  T'Hcy  are  called  Tilula  becaufe  they  re- 
^  femble  little  Balls ,  the  Greeks  call 
them  Catapotin. 

2*It  is  the  Opinion  of  Modern  Phyfitians 
that  this  way  of  making  up  Medicines  was  in¬ 
vented  only  to  deceive  the  Pallat,  that  fo  by 
fwallowing  them  down  whol,  the  bittecneis  of 
the  Medicine  mighrnot  be  perceived  or  at 

■  Icaft 


9 


'  leaft  it  might  not  be  unfufFerablej  and  indeed 

moft  of  their  Pills  though  not  all  are  very  bit- 

3  lam  of  a  clean  contrary  Opinion  to  this, 
I  rather  think  they  were  done  up  in  this  hard 
form  that  lo  they  might  be  the  longer  in  dige- 
fting ,  and  my  Opinion  is  grounded  upon 
Reafon  too,  not  upon  Fancy  nor  Hear- fay  5 
The  firft  invention  of  Pills  was  to  purge  the 
Head,  now  as  I  told  you  before,  dlich  Infir¬ 
mities  as  lay  neer  the  paifages,  were  beft  re¬ 
moved  by  Decodions,  becaufe  they  pafs  to 
the  grieved  part  fooneft,  fo  here,  if  the  infir- 

,  mity  lie  in  the  Head  or  any  other  remote  part, 
the  beft  way  is  to  ufe  Pills,  becaufe  they  are 
longer  in  digeftion,  and  therefore  the  better  a- 
blc  to  call  the  offending  Humor  to  them.’ 

4  If  I  ftiould  tell  you  here  along  Tale  of 
Medicines  working  by  Sympathy  and  Anti¬ 
pathy,  you  would  not  underftand  a  word  of  it, 
they  that  are  fit  to  make  Phyfitians  mvj  find  it 
in  the  Treatife  :  All  Modern  Phyfitians  know 
not  what  belonged  to. a  Sympathetical  Cure, 
no  more  than  a  Cookoo  knows  what  belongs 
to  Flats  and  Sharps  in  Mufick,  but  follow  the 
vulgar  road,  and  call  it  a  hidden  quality  be¬ 
caufe ’tis  hid  from  the  Eyes  of  Dunces,  and 
indeed  none  but  Aftrologers  can  give  a  reafon 
of  it,  and  Phyfick  without  Reafon  is  like  a 
pudding  without  Fat. 

y  The  way  to  make  Pills  is  very  eafie,  for 
with  the  help  of  a  Peftle  and  Mortar  and  a  lit¬ 
tle  diligence, 'you  may  make  any  Pouder  into 
Pills,  either  with  Syrup  or  the  j  elly  I  told  you 
of  before. 

Chap.  ult. 

T/;e  way  of  mixing  SMedicims 
according  to  the  Caufe  of  the 
"Difeafe  and  part  of  the 
dy  ajfiiBed, 

THis  being  indeed  the  Key  of  the  Work, 
I  ftiall  be  fomthing  the  more  dilligent 
in  it ;  I  (hall  deliver  my  felf  thus 
I.  To  the  Vulgar. 

2.  To  Such  as  ftudy  .AflroLogy,  or  Juch 
as  ftudy  Thyftck  ^ftrolomally. 

Firft  to  the  Vulgar  :  Kind  fouls  I  am  forry 
it  hath  been  your  hard  miihap  to  have  been  fo 
long  trained  in  fuch  Egyptian  darknefs,  even 
darknefs  which  to  your  forrsws  may  be  ftltj 
the  vulgar  road  of  Phyfick  is  not  my  praftice, 
and  I  am  therefore  the  more  unfit  to  give  you 
*  Galen's  advice  i  and  1  have  now  publiftied  a  little 
^rt  of  Book  which  will  fully  inftrua  you  not 
Thyrtck-  only  in  the  knowledg  of  your  own  Bodies 
but  alfo  in  fit  Medicines  to  remedy  each  part 


of  it  when  afflifted,  mean  fcafon  take  thefe 
few  Rules  to  ftay  your  Stomachs. 

1.  With  the  Difcafe  regard  the  Caufe  and 
part  of  the  Bodv  afflided,  for  example,  fup- 
pofe  a  Woman  be  fubjed  to  mifeatry  through 
wind,  thus  do, 

1.  Look  [^.Abortion']  in  the  Table  of  Dif- 
eafesj  and  you  ftiall  be  direded  by  that 
how  many  Herbs  prevent  mlfcarriage. 

2.  Look  Imnd"]  in  the  fame  Table,  and 
you  ftiall  fee  how  many  of  thofe  Herbs 
expell  wind. 

Thele  are  the  Herbs  Medicinal  for  your 
Grief. 

2.  In  all  Difeafes  ftrengthen  the  part  of  the 
Body  afflided. 

?.  In  mixed  Difeafes  there  lies  fome  diffi¬ 
culty,  for  lomtimes  two  parts  of  the  Body  are 
afflided  with  contrary  Humors  the  one  to  the 
other,  fomtimes  one  part  is  afflided  with  two 
contrary  Humors,  as  fomtimes  the  Liver  is 
afflided  with  Choller  and  Water,  as  when  a 
man  hath  both  a  Dropfie  and  the  yellow  Jaun¬ 
dice,  a^d  this  is  ufually  mortal. 

In  the  former ,  fuppofc  the  Brain  be  too 
cold  and  moift,  and  the  Liver  too  hot  and 
dry,  thus  do, 

1.  Keep  yeur  Head  outwardly  warn?- 

2.  Accuftomyour  fclf  to  fmell  of  hot  Herbs. 

3.  Tal^c  aPili  that  heats  the  Head  at  night 
going  to  bed. 

4.  In  the  mor?mg  la\e  a  DecoCiion  that 
cools  the  Liver ^  for  that  quiclily  pajfetk 
the  Stomneb)  and  h  at  the  Liver  imme¬ 
diately. 

You  muft  not  think  (Courteous  People) 
that  I  can  fpend  time  to  give  you  examples  of 
all  Difeafes,  thefe  are  enough  to  let  you  fee  fo 
much  light  as  you  without  Art  are  able  to  re¬ 
ceive,  If  I  fhould  fet  you  to  look  upon  the  Sun 
I  ftiould  dalle  your  eyes  and  make  you  blind. 

Secondly,  To  fuch  as  ftudy  Afttology  (who 
are  the  only  men  I  know  that  are  fit  to  ftudy 
Phyfick,  Phyfick  without  Aftrology,  being  like 
a  Lamp  without  Oyl)  you  are  men  I  excee¬ 
dingly  refped,  and  (uch  Documents  as  my 
Brain  can  give  you  at  prefent  (being  abfent 
from  my  ftudy)  I  ftiall  give  you,  and  an  exam¬ 
ple  to  ftiew  the  proof  of  them. 

1.  Fortifie  the  Body  with  Herbs  of  the  Na¬ 
ture  of  the  lord  of  the  Afcendent,  ’tis  no  mat¬ 
ter  whether  he  be  a  Fortune  or  an  Infortune 
in  this  cafe. 

2.  Let  your  Medicine  be  fomthing  Antipa¬ 
thetical  to  the  lord  of  the  fixth. 

3.  Let  your  Medicine  be  fomthing  of  the 
Nature  of  the  Sign  afeending. 

4.  If  the  lord  of  the  Tenth  be  ftrong,  make 
ufe  of  his  Medicines. 

5.  If  this  cannot  well  be,  make  ufe  of  the 
Medicines  of  the  lig^lt  of  time. 

6.  Be  fure  alwaies  fortifie  the  grieved  part 
of  the  body  by  Sympathetical  Remedies. 

'  ^  7-  Regard 


!• 


I  / 


Ths  EitgliJ})^  Thyfitian. 


^53 


7.  Regard  the  Heart,  keep  that  upon  the 
Wheels  becaufe  the  Sun  is  the  Fountain  of 
Life,  ahd  therefore  thofe  Uni verfal  Remedies 
AnTum  potabUCi  and  the  Phylofophers  Stone, 
cure  all  Difeafes  by  only  fortifying  the  Heart. 

But  that  this  may  appear  unto  you  as  cleer 
as  the  Sun  when  he  is  upon  the  Meridian,  I 
here  quote  you  an  Exar^le,  which  I  perfor¬ 
med  when  1  was  as  far  off  from  my  lludy  as  I 
am  now>  yet  am  I  not  afhamed  the  world 
fhould  fee  how  much  or  little  of  my  Leflon  I 
have  learned  without  Book. 

Onfnly,  165 1 .  there  came  a  Letter  to 
.  me  out  of  Bedferd(hirei  from  a  Gentleman 
(at  that  lime)  altogether  to  me  unknown, 
though  fince  well  known,  who  was  a  Student 
both  in  Aftrologic  and  Phyfick :  The  words 
which  are  thcfcj 

Mr.  Culpeper 

Siy  Love  remembred  unto  you,  although  I 
know  you  not  by  face',  ya  becaufe  I  do  much 
'cefped  that  pretty  little  Lai'k,  you  fo  lately  let 
fly  into  the  world,  which  you  call  Semciotica 
Uranica,  which  I  have  lately  taken  into  my 
Cage  >  I  am  therefore  imbofdned  to  write  unto 
you  in  the  behalf  of  a  Neighbors  i-i'ife,  who  is 
take?i  with  a  very  violent  Difeafe  which  began 


in  the  lowr  parts  of  her  Body,  but  is  no'w  af~ 
tended  upwards,  and  tormenteth  her  in  her 
Breaft,  Throat,Tongue,  and  Lips :  This  Dif~ 
eafe  took  pojf '^jji  on  of  her  (nsjhe  relatetb  tome) 
about  a  fortnight  before  Michaelmas  laft,  but 
the  certain  day  and  hour Jhe  is  not  able  to  no¬ 
minate  >  (hejentfor  me,  and  enquired  whether 
fie  were  not  under  an  ill  Tongue  or  not,  or  of 
what  nature  the  Difeafe  woe  :  I  have  fcntyoit 
the  cnclofed  Scheam,^!  could  find  but  one  te(ti- 
mony  ofFafeination  oi'  witchcraft,  which  was 
one  Sign  pojfejfing  the  Cusps  of  the  Twelfth 
and  Fir(t  Eoufes,  which  to  me  holds  forth  no 
morethanafirongfu^itionofit  by  the  Ce¬ 
rent',  However  lam  confident  there  is  a  Na¬ 
tural  Vtfeaf  which  hurts  much,  becaufe  the 
Lord  of  the  Sixt,  which  ufually  gives  fignifir 
cation  of  Natural  Difeafes,  is  now  placed  in 
the  Afcendent-,  but  at  prefe'nt  I  for  be  a:r  to 
make  any  large  difeourf  of  mine  own  Opinions, 
being  defirous  that  you  Would  endeavor  your 
Skill  in  this  Cure,  ftrr  there  is  not  a  DoBor  of 
them  all  far  ornear  that  have  been  fo  skilful 
tofindouttheDifeaf,  much  lefi  to'effcB  the 
Cure.  Sr.  I  expeSi  your  Anfwer mean  time 
bidyoufarewel,  andremaifi  yours  inAffeBi- 
en,  &c. 


The  inclofcd  Scheam. 


A  a  a 


My 


1 


■  - 


Tf^e  Englijh  Thyjitian, 


My  Anfwcr  to  the  Letter,  was  to  this  cfFeft. 
Sir, 

I  received  yours,  July  2,5.  wherein  I  find 
your cRclofcd  Schcam,  and  (I  fiippcfe)  the 
nature  of  the  Difeafe,and  have  fent  you  fuch  an 
Anfwer  as  I  could,  being  far  from  my  Study, 
which  I  entrcJtt  you  to  take  in  good  part, being 
Tcftinanticalmo  Conferipa.  As  for  the  ig¬ 
norance  of  your  Country  Dodors,  they  wan¬ 
ting  the  true  Judgment  of  Afirology,  is  to  me 
no  waies  admirable  j  I  perceive  you  to  be  a 
yeng  man  by  the  time  of  your  Genefis,  which 
you  all'o  fent  me,  beware  whom  you  truft  with 
that,  he  that  knows  your  Nativity  knows 
when  ill  Diredions  operate,  and  if  he  be  an 
Enemy,  knows  when  to  do  you  a  mifehief  j  If 
Odi  had  not  had  his  Nativity,  he  had 
never  gotten  his  Head  off^  but  to  inftrud 
you  being  a  yong  Student,  I  fliall  give  you 
my  Judgment  Methodically. 

Dtacritica. 

You  fay  you  can  find  no  Arguments  of 
Witclacratt,  but  only  one  Sign  poflefifing  the 
Culps  of  both  Twelth  and  Afcendent,  but  if 
you  had  regarded  the  Propinquity  of  Venus  to 
Saturn  you  would  have  made  another  of  that, 
yet  do  not  1  think  ftie  is  bewitched,  becaiife  of 
other  more  prevalent  teftimonies  5  the  Moon 
pafling  from  the  beams  of  Mars  to  the  beams 
ofrewwmayfcemtogive  fome  fufpition  of 
Honefty,  and  the  Difeafc  to  come  that  way, 
which  is  cncreafed  by  M/tfs  his  being  in  the 
Afcendent  in  Scorpit),  and  the  Dragons  Tail 
upon  the  Cufp,  yet  I  can  hardly  beleeve  this, 
for  CoMda  in  a  humane  Sign  ufually  gives 
Slanders  and  not  Tales  of  Truth,  ’tis  a  hun¬ 
dred  to  one  if  fhe  fufier  not  in  point  of  good 
name  by  the  vulgar  [this  was  too  true]  Be- 
fides,  the  neernefs  of  Venus  to  Saturn  may 
well  fliew  trouble  of  mind,  and  it  being  in  the 
ninth  Houfe,  pray  enquire  whether  fhe  have 
not  been  troubled  about  fome  tenents  in  Reli¬ 
gion  [the  trouble, of  mind  was  true,  but  it  was 
about  a  ftranger,  which  the  ninth  Houfe  alfo 
Cgnifics.] 

T)iagngjheAf 

Venus,  Lady  of  the  Twelfth,  and  Afccn- 
dent,  and  Eigth,  {hews  her  alwaies  to  be  her 
own  foe  in  reijpeft  of  Health  J  and  truly  I  be- 
leevc  the  original  of  the  Difeafc  was  aSurfet 
either  by  eating  moitt  Fruits,  or  clfe  by  cat¬ 
ching  wet  in  travelling  ;  Venus  with  Saturn 
who  is  in  fquave  to  the  Afcendent  troubles  her 
Breaft  with  tough  Flegm  and  Mclancholly : 
Befides,  there  being  a  molt  forcible  reception 
between  the  Moon  and  Venus  from  fruitful 
Signs,  1  queftion  whether  fhc  be  not  with 
Child  or  not,  the  Moon  being  in  the  fifth  1 
Houfe,  Mars  is  lord  of  the  Difeafe,  really  in 
the  Scorpion,  and  accidentally  in  the  Afcen¬ 
dent,  together  with  Aries  on  the  fixt,  llievr 
the  Difeafc  keeps  his  Court  in  the  Womb,  and 


accidentally  afflias  the  Head  from  thence,  fo 
that  heat  of  the  Womb  muft  needs  be  caufe  cf 
the  prefent  diftemper,  and  Mars  in  a  moift 
Sign  in  the  firft  ncer  the  fecond  may  well  de¬ 
note  heat,  and  breaking  out  about  her  Face 
and  Throat. 

Prognoftica. 

Whether  Ihe  be  curable  or  not,  or  how  or 
when  the  Difeafe  will  end  is  our  next  Point  5 
T  ruly  I  can  fee  no  danger  of  death  the  Moon 
being  llrong  in  her  hain,  and  applying  by 
Trine  with  a  Rrong  reception  to  the  Lady  of 
the  Afcendent  5  yet  this  is  certain,  <S^tars 
ftrong  in  a  fixed  Sign  will  maintain  the  Dif¬ 
eafe  ftoutly,  her  hopes  will  be  but  final  when 
comes  to  the  Body  of  Jii- 

gufi  2.  for  Ihe  will  be  overprelTed  with  Me- 
lancholly,  the  time  I  fuppofe  of  her  Cure  mav 
be  (if  good  coinfcs  be  taken)  when  Mars 
leaves  the  Sign  he  is  in  ,and  comes  to  the  place 
where  the  Body  cf  Jupiter  is,  o-r  at  Icall:  then 
it  may  turn  to  another  Difeafc  more  propiti¬ 
ous  j  the  Sun  ftrong  in  the  Tenth  foews  file 
may  be  cured  by  Medicine,  and  he  being  ex¬ 
alted  in  the  feventh,  and  caput  there,  I  do 
not  know  but  you  arc  as  likely  a  man  to  do  it 
as  any. 

Jndkationcs  Curatlzix. 

It  is  confelfed  here  that  the  Sim  bcin<»  ex¬ 
ceeding  ftrong  in  the  tenth  Houfe,  fiioutd  na¬ 
turally  fignifie  the  curative  Medicine,  and  as 
true  that  the  evils  of  Mars,  heat  in  the 
Womb,  and  a  fait  humor  in  the  blood  ought 
to  be  removed  before  you  meddle  with  the 
tough  Flegm  in  the  Breaft,  but  yet  feeing  the 
Difeafe  feems  rather  to  participate  of  offen¬ 
ding  heat  than  any  other  Simple  quality,  you 
muft  have  a  care  of  hot  Medicines  left  you  go 
about  iiryiem  oleo  e^xtmgiicrc ,  the  Medicines 
muft  I .  oe  cool,  2.  ftrengthning  the  Womb, 
3.  rcprcfling  the  vapors,  4.  of  the  nature  of  Sol 
and  Venus. 

Thcrapeuticc. 

To  this  intent  I  firft  commend  unto  you 
ftinking  Arrach,  a  pattci  n  whereof  I  l«ivc  fent 
you  enclofed,  you  may  find  it  upon  Dunghils, 
efpecially  fuch  as  arc  made  of  Horfe-dung  :  It 
Is  cold  and  moift,  an  Herb  of  Venus  in  the 
Scorpion  j  Alfo  Ros  Solis  an  Herb  of  the  Sun 
and  under  the  Coelcftial  Crab,  may  do  very 
well,  and  the  better  bccaufe  Venus  is  in  Can¬ 
cer :  It  grows  upon  Bogs  in  iimillcd  places,- 
and  is  in  flower  -about  this  time,  it  grows 
very  low ,  with  roundifli  green  Leaves  full 
of  red  hairs ,  and  is  ffulleft  of  dew  when 
the  Sun  is  hotteft ,  whence  it  took  its 
name;  tothefeyou  mayadTanfic,  which  I 
,takc  to  be  an  Herb  of  Venus  iaLihra, nnd  Lct- 
ticc  if  you  pleafe  which  is  an  Hcib  of  thie 
Moon,  Mars  having  his  fail  in  Cancer  they  a-ic 
all  harmlefs,  you  may  ufc  them  according  to 
your  own  defcrction;  alfo  Orpine,  another 
Herb  of  the  Moon  is  very  good  jft  this  cafe. 

Sir^ 


Sir,  I  wifh  you  wellj  and  if  you  efteem  of 
my  Lark  above  his  deferts,  I  pray  trim  his 
Feathers  for  him  (eprreft  the  Errors  by  the 
Srrata)  elf?  will  he  make  but  unpleafmg  Mu- 
hek  Thus  remain  yours,  &c. 

1  the  richer  eh^e  this  Figure  to  judg  of, 
becaufc  none  fliould  have  juft  occafion  to  fay 
of  us  Aftrologers  that  we  do  as  Phyfitians  vul¬ 
gar  pradice  is,  when  they  judg  of  Pifsj  firft 
pump  what  they  can  out  of  •  the  Querent,  and 
then  judg  by  his  words  ;  of  “which  J  will  re- 
hearfe  you  one  merry  ftory,  and  fo  I  will  con¬ 
clude  the  Book. 

,  A  Woman  whofe  Husband'had  bruifed  him- 
felfj  took  his  Water,  and  away  to  the  Do^ior 
trots  (he  i  the  Doftor  takes  the  Pifs  and  fliakcs 
it  about.  How  long  hath  this  fmy  been  ill 
(faith  he)  Sr.  faith  the  Woman ,  He  hath 
been  ill  theie  two  daies.  This  is  a  mans.,w»ter 
qapththeDodor  prcfently,  this  he  learned 
by  the  word  H£j  then  looking  on  the  water 
he  fpied  blood  in  it,  the  man  hath  had  a  bruife 
faith  he,  I  indeed  faith  the  woman,  my  Huf- 
band  fell  down  a  pair  of  flairs  backwardsjthen 
the  Dodor  knew  well  enough  that  what  came 
firft  to  danger  mull  needs  be  his  back  and’ 
fhoulders,  faid,  the  Bruife  lay  there  }  the  wo¬ 
man  Ihe  admired  at  the  Do  ft  or  s  slfil,  and  told 


him,  that  if  he  could  tell  her  one  thing  more 
flie  would  account  him  the  ablell  Phyfitian  in 
Europe  3  well,  what  was  that  ?  How  many 
her  Husband  fell  down,  this  was  a  hard 
Queftion  indeed ,  able  to  puzle  a  flron^rer 
Brain  than  Mr.  Dodor  had,  to  pumping  goes 
he,,  and  having  taken  the  Urinal  and  given  it 
a  lliake  or  two,  enquires  whereabout  flie  lived 
and  knowing  well  the  place,and  that  the  Hou- 
fes  thereabouts  were  but  low  built  Houfes 
made  anfwcr  (after  another  view  of  the  Urine 
for  faihion  fake)  that  probably  he  might  fall 
down  fome  feven  or  eight  flairs  s  ah,  quoth 
the  woman,  now  I  lee  you  know  nothing,  my 
Husband  fell  down  thirty  5  thirty!  quoth  the 
Dodor,  and  fnatching  up  the  Urinal,  JsBere 
all  the  water  faith  he  ?  no  faith  the  woman,  I 
fpilt  fome  in  putting  of  it  in,  look  you  there 
quoth  Mr.^  Dodor,  there  were  all  the  other 
flairs  fpilt. 

Yet  miftake  me  not,  I  do  not  deny  but: 
fuch  whofe  daily  experience  is  to  judg  Waters, 
and  ufually  judg  a  hundred  in  a  day  may  know 
fomthing  by  them :  If  any  thing  may  be 
known  by  Urine,  lam  fure  it  may  by  Art, 
put  them  both  together ,  vis  imita  fortiori 
Thus  I  take  my  leave  of  you  3  be  diligent  and 
I  am  yours. 


I 

A  a  a  2 


]S^ch, 


A  N 

ALPHABETICAL  CATALOGUE' 

O  F  T  H  E 

DISEASES 

SPECIFIED  IN  THIS 

T  R  E  A  T  I  S  E  = 

Together  with  the  Page  where  to  find  the  Cure. 


I  A  Bortlon,  17. 
jLJLAdders,  9. 

Afterbirth,  35  ii  20  32 
34  41  43  50  53  67  86 
192  195  212  234. 
Aconitum,  195 
Agues,  25  68  10  II  15 
16  22  26  27  30  34  37 

47  49  50  54  55  58  62 
66  73  75  77  81  88  196 
199  201  209  210  215 
219  220  223  224  227 
232  234235. 

Andicomes,  7  12  20. 
Apofthumesj  2  ii  32  49 
54  58  65  71  91  231. 
Appetite  loft,  3  10  14  16 
31  32  196  201  220239. 
Arteries,  10  12  25  61. 

Scf  Anthonies  fire,  14  3  4 
37  45  62  63  70  78  199 
205  210  224  237. 
Almonds  of  the  Lac,  17  89 
Ach,  27  195  202  205  210 
222  224. 

Aduft  ChoIIer,  44. 

Aduft  Melancholly,  57. 
Afthma,  67  237. 

Apoplexy,  72  81  83  235. 


B 

Baldnefs,  14  47  190. 

Barrennefs,  28  72  89. 

Belly,  28  27  59  77  78 
85  87  192  201  206  220 
226  231. 

Belching,  14  24. 

Binding,  23  15  17  38 
53  62  86  196  206  228. 

Beauty,  29  38  47  59* 

Breath,  12  13  14  24  26 
36  48  51  66  67  76  89 
189  190  199  217  221 
226. 

Bleeding,  i  6  13  15  17 
24  28  53  54  65  67  68 
71  72  84  86  194  196 
200  ,220  213  219  22S 
229  231.’ 

Blood,  18  2136  39  4445 
69  205  209  212  230. 

Bloody  Flux,  2  10  17  34 

35  37  53  54  56  59  60 
61  71  92  228. 

Black  and  blew  Spots,  17 
20  24  26  41  53  59  66 
88  204  214  239. 

Bowels,  I  40  92. 

Bees,  216.  ' 

Black  Jaundice,  22.  !  1 

Blsudder,  8  22  25  31  38  j 


.50  52  73. 

Blifters  14, 

Breaft,  i  2  3  s  10  41  55 
78  88  192. 

Back,  34  38. 

Brain,  8  10  27  49  72. 
Burning,  3  5  7  13  14  25 
28  37  42  47  68  69  78 
92  192  193  194  200 

231. 

Birth,  50  86. 

Bruifes,  7  12  14  15  22  32 

34  37  42  43-  50  52  76 
78  88  89. 

Boyls,  10  12  41  220  221. 
Bees,  II. 

Breafts  8  12  53  61  82  89 
194  200  201. 

Broken  Bones  20  21  37  49 
50  52  54  84  213. 

C 

Cachexia,  38  42. 

Cancers  2  29  36  53. 
Cantharides  17. 

Cankers  17  24  25  28  33 
42  48  53  54  56  60  86 
88  196  212  2Tp  220- 
Childbirth  12  14  52  237. 
Chops  5  82  197  236. 
Clenfing  2  13  51  56  1S9 
194  214. 


Chincough 


jin  jilphabetical  Table  of  the  Vifeafes,  <s*c. 

Chincough  78. 

61  62  66  6>j  70  75  76 

Frenzy,  18  38  73  198. 

Chollick  2  5  9  27  28  45 

89  90  92  201  226  231. 

French  Pox,  49  64  66  206 

47  49  50  61  62  64  65 

Diflocations  21. 

230. 

72  87  189  190  197  210 

Dogs  66 

Fundament,  17  41  52. 

215  235  236. 

Dropfie  3  8  9  ii  20  22 

G 

Cough  2  4  12  15  16  18 

27  28  30  46  49  53  55 

Gall,  2  27  42  44  45  64. 

19  34  36  41  48  50  53 

58  62  63  66  70  78  79 

Gangrenes,  2023  37  4271 

54  58  62  63  66  67  73 

85  92  190  192  195  196 

89. 

j  75  76  86  87  88  89  91. 

209  210  215  225  227. 

Gauls,  13. 

92  189  190  191  195 

Diranefs  of  Sight,  49  81 

Gnats,  50. 

I  199  213  214  210  212 

197  202  207  209  215. 

Gout,  2  5  7  8  10  I r 

215  232. 

Dulnefs,  39  213. 

12  15  25  34  37  39  41 

Choller  23  8  10  28  30 

Drying  2  4  1 5  62  90  197 

48  54  55  55^  63  64  79 

37  41  46  50  54  57  64 

198  235. 

89  90  191  192  193  ! 

69  72  77  81  82  194  196 

Drunkennefs  69. 

196  19S  200  209  230  ^ 

199  210  214  215  209 

Dreams  72  82  199. 

231.  i 

223  230  233  239. 

Disjundures  87  89  235. 

Gums,  17  23  192  205226. 

Cold  4  15  27  79  89  236. 

E 

Guts,  195. 

Chilblains  64. 

Ears,  2  10  12  14  18  31 

Gravel,  17  20  21  28  31  52 

Cods  13  45  64  65  77  210 

35  47  52  68  70  82  89 

57  59  79  82  89191  194 

236. 

190  197  205  235. 

204  21 1  214  216  220.  1 

Congealed  Blood  7. 

Err  wigs  64. 

Griping,  2.  ll 

Cools  9  15  25  53  62  190 

Epidemical  Difeafes,  4  14 

Groyn,  66  87.  1 

196  199  214  220  223 

20  24  32  75  91. 

H 

228. 

Eyes  68  loii  121831 

Hcadach,  21  47  54  58  72  j 

Convullion  9  15  19  26  30 

34  41  45  47  51  53  56 

85  189  192  205  209  i| 

38  48  54  58  59  62  72 

63  68  73  77  81  205  215 

224  232.  \ 

78  85  87  192  221. 

223  224  236  239. 

Head,  28  34  72.  i| 

Cramp  9  19  26  27  30  38 

F 

Heart,  9  10  47  205  23^.  ^  1 

48  54  58  59  62  72  78 

Fainting  5  10  72  192. 

Hemorrhoids,  30  ^3  52  ^4  1 

1  85  86  87  89  192  195 

Falling-licknefs ,  18  20  33 

55  86  89  195  224*  1 

209  212  221. 

38  56  58  61  66  72  77 

Horfes  tired,  7.  1 

Confumpcion  18  25  42  46 

79  S3  92  192  195- 

Hortnets,  ii.  1 

67. 

Falls  21  32  34  j2  78* 

Hoarcencfs ,  25  31  34  73  1 

Corns  68  237. 

Felones  7  12. 

233*  1 

Clotted  blood  33  43  209. 

Fatnefs,  51. 

Humors,  31  75  Si  82  190  1 

Coftivenefs  33. 

Flegm,  3  5  8  19  21  22  25 

194  197  206  236.  1 

j  Corrofion  53. 

31  32  40  50  58  67  69 

Hypochondria,  42  44.  1 

Curdled  Milk  92. 

79  81  85  189  192  T97 

Hiccough,  43.  1 

D 

209  215  217  224. 

1  1 

Dandriff  14  43  78. 

Fleas  4  7. 

Jaundice,  2389  10  ii  1 

Dead  child  21  53  79  192 

Feavers  lo  54  65  79  229. 

15  26  27  44  55  57  63  1 

195  212  235. 

Fiflulaes  21  28  33  45  53 

85  88  189  220  223  230.  1 

1  Deformity  50  52  193. 

55  71  88  189  203. 

Jaws,  41.  1 

1  Deafnefs  2  64  216  217 

Flux,  2  3  5  9  10  12  14 

Joynts,  7  12  13  22  37  59  1 

1  221  235. 

21  25  33  37  8  44  53 

88  207  220  222  226.  '  1 

I  Diabets  17  230, 

54  56  60  67  69  71  72 

Illiack  Paflion,  216.  J 

i;  Digefts  33. 

75  84  85  194  199  201 

Inflamations,  I  45  7  12  17  j| 

j  Diffolves  33. 

209  213  225  328  229. 

20  21  26  31  34  37  45  '1 

i  Difury  8  9  12  13  15  2r 

Forgctfulnefs  57. 

47  53  54  62  63  64  67  j| 

!  22  24  25  26  28  31  32 

Freckles,  5  20  31  39  41 

68  71  72  73  74  77  89  1 

37  39  41  42  45  47  49 

44  53  75  76  88  191 

82  90  91  92  190  191  ll 

50  52  53  55  57  58  59 

226  238. 

199  220  223  233.  II 

Bbb  Impo-  ^^1 

1 

Itch,  2  3  II  1229  3241  44 
57  59  66  196  206. 
Indigcftion,  9  10  287275. 
K 

Kings  Evil,  7  1 1  30  35  52  56 
597075  78  86202. 
Kidneys,  70  225. 

L 

teprbfie,  9  11  26  42  47  52 
-  53  83  88 91. 

Lethargy,  39  51  72  87  91 
192  207  212  215. 

Liver,  3  5  10  11  13  152729 
3038  4142  49  5761  66 
74767892  189  202  203 
209219227230. 

Lice,  3  210. 

Lechery,  63- 
Loathing  of  meat,  44. 
Loofncfs,  5  43. 

Loofe  teeth,  48. 

Longings,  80. 

Lungs,  3  II 3253  6875  197 
230237. 

Luft  provokes,  1 89. 

Luft  flops,  199. 

M 

Mare,  23  193. 

Madnefs,  57  193. 

Mad-dogs,  5  10  15  25  47 
57  82  89  91. 

Meazics,  17  229. 

Megrim,  12  224. 
Melancholly,  5  6  102426 
42  50  57  58  76  81  82  85 
192  193  197  206  226  234. 
Memory,  8  49  57  212. 
Mother,  69  12  15  1724  28 
294348  507985  8990 

191  193  215  223  235. 
Mineral  Vapors,  58. 

Mind,  10. 

Milk  in  Nuries,  18507277 

234- 

Milk  in  Cattel,  36. 

Mouth,  16  18  23  33  5978 

192  196200205  215  219 
220229233. 

Morphew,  20  42  43  44  47  I 
48  62  66  73  88  191  210 

233* 


Navil,  200. 

Nails  in  the  Flefli,  2. 
Neppies,  54. 

Nerves,  12  1737. 
Nightfhade eaten, "SpL  '7. 
Noife  in  the  Ears,  2  14  64 
66  78. 

Nits,  225. 

Nofe,  615  68  196. 

Nolime  tangere,  fe  Polipta* 
O 

Obflrudions,  3  9  10  ii  15 
20  21  2829  30374244 
49  51  53  56  57  66  6978 
87  189  195  210  215  223 
227. 

Opening,  3342  51  1S9  190 

I  201  214. 

Opium,  51  86- 
P 

Pain,  2  12  15  35  3743  63 
82  192  195  199  205  209 
210211  221. 

Palfey,  15  20  32  34  38  47 
51  58  67  72  76  83  216 
217. 

Piles,  17  37  41  70  80  1 91 
196. 

Pifling  Blood,  15  22  67. 

Pin  and  Web,  63  23 1232. 

Plague,  24  9  1718  1920 
2432  3  3  41  4243  48  57 
58  65  69  7991  194  201 
210  217  220  223  232 
236. 

Pleurefy,4  32  33  54  75  77 
88  89  197  217  233. 

Poyfon,  2  49  II  17  18  19 
20  41  43  48  5  8  65  67  77 
79  88  9091  194  201  210 
220  221  229  234  235. 

Phthifick,  163237  62  71  73 
77  92  196  197  199207. 

Purples,  17  54  229. 

Pufhes,  37206221  223  239. 

Pimples,  3943  53  5767206 
210217224. 

Pohpus,  41  53  89  197. 

Privities,  2  37  65.  1 


C^uartan  Agues,  2  49  1 97. 
Quotidian  Agues,  49. 
Quinfie,  33  38  75  92  202 

'  .2-33  239- 

Quickens  the  Sences,  2 1 2. 

R 

Raw  Humors,  43. 

Rhewm,  38  39  4071  81  89 
195  196  199  200  205  207 
1  212. 

Reds,  19205. 

Red  Faces,  67  7c. 

Reins,  94950  5266  86  216 

223  225. 

Rickets,  9. 

Ringworms,  10  19  20  2963 
666874  82  196  210  217 
220236. 

Roughnefs  of  the  Skin,  74. 
Running  of  the  Reins.  1 8  74 
209  211  213  214222. 
Ruptures,  9  15  17  26  34  36 
37  3  8  40  45  47  50  59  71 
92  2n  213  214  226229. 
S 

Scaldheads,  9, 

5  1047  68  6978 

92191. 

Scabs,  23910  12  14  15  19 

23  25  34  39  44  53  ^9 

66  1 89  191. 

Scars,  39218  231. 

Sciatica,  2  5  7  8  1225  30  34 
3^  39  51  55  59  61  64  69 

70  88  89  19^  202  220 
226. 

ScurfF,  14  15  3941  52  7678 
217. 

Serpents.  3  82650  82. 

Seed  encreafeth,  3  3  49. 
Scurvy,  20  39202226=. 

Sides,  22  32  55  67. 

Stifnefs,  13. 

Shingles,  34  189  196. 
Smelling,  14.. 

Smal  pox,  17. 

Sneezing,  55. 

Sores,  20  23  2425  26  28  55 

71  76  82  215  220  230. 
Spitting  blood,  18  36  3744 

48  69  90  196  212. 


Splinters, 


afid  their  Qurcs  mentioned  in  this  Sooh 


Splinters,  2  20  34425963 
232. 

Spleen,  236810111515 
262730  42  505758  59 
61  62  66  69  72  77  78  81 
83  88  202  220  221  227 
230  235  237. 

[  Spots,  5  9  12  20  38  3941  48 
52627375218. 

Stitches,  9  15  20  22  27  28 
91  212 227  232. 

Stomach, 2  3  5  ii  12  15  16 
22  32374048  50  55  62 
666872  78  80  190  209 
220. 

Stoppings,  45. 

Surfets,  25  74  239. 

Swellings,  4  721  25  26  27 
323437  4142  43  65  69 
82202220  224  231  233 
239- 

Strangury,  4821  49  52  60 
6773  19^  2.21  232. 

Stone,  p  II  12  15  15  16  17 
202122252728  31  36 
39454748  49  60  63  65 
67  70  78  80  84  85  91  190 
191  202203  221  214215 

216  221  227. 

Sunburning  14  38  47  73 
191  226. 

Swoonings  10  44  85. 

-  Sinews  12  15  25  27  33  51 
55  61  64  87  200. 

T 

Teeth  loofe  3  59. 


Teeth  52  191  200  233, 
Tertian  Agnes,  2- 
Terms  flops,  i  1418  2433 
53  54  59  62  65  66  67 
74  86  91  194  195  219 
203225235. 

Terms  provokes  ii  15  21  24 
25  28  33  34  41  43  48  50 
55  57  58  59  66  76  81  85 
86  87  8992  192210  213 
215  221  230232  239, 
Tetters,  15  29  66  67  74  196 
290220236. 

Thorns  2  20  34  49  52  78 
217  232, 

Thirft  196  22  233. 

Throat  2  41  43  191  205  213 
219220221  229233-235. 
Toothach  3  7  8  14  18  22 
34  55  192  196  200  203 
225. 

Travail  in  Women  36  77. 
Trembling  72. 

V 

Veneraous  Beafls  ii  13  1 8 
25  30  4748/5051  55  59 
61  66  67  69  71  88  89  192 
236  240. 

Vertigo  12  13  20  38  5072. 
Vipers  9. 

Veins  36  71. 

ulcers  5  7  15  I S  1920  25 
262831  33  3,8  39  41  43 

45  47  52  53  55  60  65  75 
7<5  79  80  86  89  90  194 
196201  203  3,10211  214 


215  217  220  221  226229 
,  236 

Venery9;^3  8290  189219 
204. 

Vomiting  i  8  17  22  24  26 
36  45  72  82  90  190  192 
219201  220225  236^ 

W 

Watching  68. 

Warts  2982  87230. 
Wearinefs  1315. 

Wens  230. 

Wind  123243485051  63 
7981  82  89  91  215  232 
235. 

Witchcraft  14  65. 

Whites,  I  7  14183437  74 
205  206  207. 

Whitlces  20. 

Worms,  5  7  24  2943  54  69 
91  202211  215  225. 
Womb  1720  50  89233. 
Wounds  I  2  7P  15  172022 
23  2426  31 35  36  37  38 

3943  45.  4:L5>o  52  5660 
05  69  74  75  79  80  84  85 
90  190  191  200  204  213 

214215217219220224 

229230. 

Wry  Necks  46. 

Wrinkles  62. 

Y 

Yellow  Jaundice  102149 

53  57^1  66  67  74  76 207 
211  215  223  239, 


PI  s. 


Xhe  ISlames  offe\'erd  ^ooks  printed  by  Peter  Cok;,  at  the  Jign  of  the  Trin^ 
'  ting  ^ ref  in  Qornhillj  by  the  Exchange,  London. 


Foiff  fiveTol  Bool^Sf  by  Nich.  Culppper,  Cent>  Student 
•  in  Phyfick  and  AftrWogy- 

I  A  Physic  a.x  D  i  R  b  c  t  dry:  Or  a 
TrannaciortJr  the  Dijpenfatory,  made  by  the 
ColledeofPh^tians  of  London.  Whcveunto  is  ad¬ 
ded,  Tbit  Key  to  s  .Method  of  "Phypc^. 

1  ADaJtECTORY  (ot  Midwives ;  or  a  Guide 

ioxWomen.  .  .  a  i-r  , 

3  An  B  P  H  E  M  E  R  1  s  for  the  year  i6f  i.  Amplihed 

with  Rational  Prediuiions  fwm  the  Book  of  the  Crea- 
'furcs.  I  Ofthe  State  oftheYedr.  z  Whatmaypro- 
bably  be  the  effeds  of  the  Conjundionof  Saturn  and 
Mars,  July  9- 1650.  in  Scotland,  Holland,  Zealand, 
rerki  Amfte-rdami  &c-  and  about.what  time  they  may 
probably  happen.  T o  which  is  joyned,  hnAftrologo- 
ThyficalVifcourf  of  the  Humane  Fertues  in  the  Body 

of  Man.  '  .  .  , 

4.  Gaibns  Art  01  Physick  j  wherein  is  laid 

It  A^efcription  of  Bodies,  Healthful,  Unhealthful, 
and  Neutral.' 

2.  Signs  of  good  and  bad  Conftitutions 


Signs 
of  the  < 


\-pain, 

'Heart, 

fi^s, 

^Tem  perature,^ 
^tungues, 
)Stomach,&'c.^ 


I  ^Ptng 
too 


"Hot, 

')Co/ci, 

yDry, 

MoHt, 

'Hot  and  dry, 
)HotandmoiP, 
'^Cold  and  dry. 
Cold  and  moi(l. 


4.  Signs  and  Caufes  of  Sicknefs. 

Tranflated  into  Englifli,  and  largely  Commented  onj 
Together  with  coiivfcnient  Medicines  for  all  particu¬ 
lar  Diftempers  of  the  Pans,  a  Defeription  of  the 
Complexion,  their  Conditions,  and  what  Diet  and 
Exercife  is  fitteft  for  them. 

A  Godly  and  Pruitful  Expofition,  on  the  firft  Epiftlc  of 
Peter.  ByUr.fohnTipgers,  Minifterofthe  Wordcf 
God  at  Dedham  in  Ejfex. 

The  Wonders  of  the  L  oiz<i-/o?2e,  by  Mr.  Samuel  Ward 
oflpfwifh. 

An  Expofition  on  the  Gofpel  of  the  E  vangelift  St.  Mat¬ 
thew.  By  Mr.  Ward. 


Clows  Chirurgery. 

Marks  of  Salvation. 

Chriftians  Engagement  for  the  Gofpel,  by  J ohn  Good¬ 
win. 

Great  Church  Ordinance  of  Baptifmi 

Mr.lini/c’s  Cafe,  containing  his  Petitions,  Narrative, 

'  and'  Speech. 

Vox  Pacifica,  or  a  Perfwahve  to  Peace. 

Dr.  Prefions  Saints  fubmilTion,  and  Satans  Overthrow. 

Pious  mans  pradicc  in  Parliament  Time. 

A  Trcatife  ofthe  Ejiclrets,  being  a  Dlfeale  .common  to 
Children pVVhefein  is  fhe#ed,  i.  The  Eflence,  a. 
The  Caufes,  3*  The  Signs,  ,4.  The  Remedies  of 
the  Difeafe.  Publifhed  in  Latin  by  Dr.  Glijjen,  Dr. 


Bate,  and  Dr.  Regemorter. 

Mr.  Symf ons  Sermon  at  Wcfiminfler. 

Mr.  Feal^s  Sermon  before  the  Lord  Major. 

Mr.  Treatife  of  Hell. 

- - of  Chrifts  Geneology. 

Seven  Boo\s  of  Jeremiah  Burroughs  lately  publi¬ 
fhed  J  As  alfo  the  Texts  of  Scripture  upon 
which  they  are  grounded. 

I  The  Rare  Jewel  of  Chrifiian  Contentment,  on  Phil. 
4.  II.  Wherin  is  (hewed,  i.  What  Contentment  is, 
2.  It  is  an  holy  Art  and  Myftery,  3.  The  Excellen¬ 
cies  of  it,  4.  The  Evil  of  the  contrary  (in  of  Mur¬ 
muring,  and  the  Aggravations  of  it.  • 

^  Gofpel- Worfhip,  onLez-ir.  19. 3.  Wherinisfhewed, 
I.  The  right  manner  of  the  Worfhip  of  God  in  ge¬ 
neral  j  and  particularly.  In  Hearing  the  Word,  Re¬ 
ceiving  the  Lords  Supper,  and  Prayer. 

3  Gofpel-Converfation ,  on  Phil.  s.  17.  Wherin  is 
(hewed,  I.  That  the  Converfations  of  Beleevers 
muft  be  above  what  could  be  by  the  Light  of  Nature^ 
2  Beyond  rhofe  that  lived  under  the  Law,  3.  And 
futablc  to  what  Truths,  the  Gofpel  holds  forth.  To. 
which  is  added,  The'MiCery  of  tbafe  Men  that  have 
their  Tortion  in  this  Life  only,  on  Pfal.  17. 14. 

4  A  Treatife  of  £ arthly-mindedncfi.  Wherin  is  (he¬ 

wed,  I  What  Earthly-mindednefs  is,  2  The  great 
E.viltherof,  on  Phil. 'i.  part  of  the  Verf. .  Alfo 
to  fhe’Tame  Book  is  joyned,  A  Treatife  of  Heavenly- 
mindednefi,  and  walking  with  God,  on  Gen.  J.  24. 
andonPfci/.  3. 20.  :  .  ’’ 

y  An  Sxpofition,  on  the  fourth,  fifth,  fixth,  and  feventh 
Chapters  of  the  Prophefie  of  Hofea.  . ,  , 

6  An  Expofition  on  the  eighth,  ninth,  and  tenth  Chap¬ 
ters  of  Hofea. 

7  An  Expofition  on  the  ekvcntbjtwelfth,and  thirteenth 
Chapters  of 

The  CompafiTionatc  Samaritan. 

Twelve  fever  al  Bool^s  of  Mr.  William  Bridg,  Collected 
into  one  Volumn.  Viz. 

1  The  great  Gofpel-Myftery  of  the  Saints  Comfort , 

and  Holinefs,  opened  and  applied  froiri  Chrifts 
Prieftly  Office.  > 

2  Satans  Power  to  Tempt }  and  Crifts  Love  to,  and. 
Care  of  His  People  under  Temptation. 

3  Thankfulnefs  required  in  every  Condition. 

4  Grace  for  Grace  j  or,  the  Overflowiiigs  of  Chrifts 
Pulnefs  receiycil  by  all  Saints,'.. 

y- The  Spiritual  Actings  o.f  . Faith,  through  Natural 
Impolnbilitics.,  . 

6  Evangelical  Repentance. 

7  The  Spiritual-Li(e,  and  In-Being  of  Chrift  in  all 

Beleevers.  . 

8  The  Woman  of  Canaan. 

9  The  Saii)rs.Hiding-I?la(:eintimc,ofGDds  Angc?. ,, 

19  Chrifts.Coroing  is  at  our  Midnight.  ’  •  '' 

11  A  Vindication  of  Ordinances. 

1 2  Grace  and  Love  beyondT  Gifts* 

Cum  multUaliis — 


